arXiv:2401.17839v1 [cs.CL] 31 Jan 2024

G LOBAL -L IAR : FACTUALITY OF LLM S OVER T IME AND
G EOGRAPHIC R EGIONS

Shujaat Mirza1 , Bruno Coelho1 , Yuyuan Cui1 , Christina Pöpper2 , and Damon McCoy1
1
New York University
2
New York University Abu Dhabi
{shujaat.mirza, bruno.coelho, yc1880, christina.poepper, mccoy}@nyu.edu

A BSTRACT
The increasing reliance on AI-driven solutions, particularly Large Language Models (LLMs) like
the GPT series, for information retrieval highlights the critical need for their factuality and fairness,
especially amidst the rampant spread of misinformation and disinformation online. Our study
evaluates the factual accuracy, stability, and biases in widely adopted GPT models, including GPT-3.5
and GPT-4, contributing to reliability and integrity of AI-mediated information dissemination.
We introduce ’Global-Liar,’ a dataset uniquely balanced in terms of geographic and temporal representation, facilitating a more nuanced evaluation of LLM biases. Our analysis reveals that newer
iterations of GPT models do not always equate to improved performance. Notably, the GPT-4 version
from March demonstrates higher factual accuracy than its subsequent June release. Furthermore, a
concerning bias is observed, privileging statements from the Global North over the Global South, thus
potentially exacerbating existing informational inequities. Regions such as Africa and the Middle
East are at a disadvantage, with much lower factual accuracy. The performance fluctuations over time
suggest that model updates may not consistently benefit all regions equally.
Our study also offers insights into the impact of various LLM configuration settings, such as binary
decision forcing, model re-runs and temperature, on model’s factuality. Models constrained to
binary (true/false) choices exhibit reduced factuality compared to those allowing an ’unclear’ option.
Single inference at a low temperature setting matches the reliability of majority voting across various
configurations. The insights gained highlight the need for culturally diverse and geographically
inclusive model training and evaluation. This approach is crucial in advancing towards global
fairness in computational systems, ensuring that AI’s technological benefits are equitably distributed
worldwide.

1

Introduction

The digital age has amplified our access to information, but in the same stride, it has magnified the challenge of
mis-/disinformation Caramancion (2020). The resulting wave of misleading content risks eroding the very foundations
of our informed societies. Now, more than ever, as societies navigate through an intricate web of data-driven decisions,
the integrity and trustworthiness of our information sources are under scrutiny Shu et al. (2020); Grimes (2021); Bovet
and Makse (2019).
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as the GPT series have experienced widespread adoption due to their advanced
capabilities in processing complex information Paul et al. (2023). Recognizing their potential impact, there has been
an increasing focus on aligning these models with facts through Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback
(RLHF) to avoid harmful content generations Ouyang et al. (2022). As users increasingly place trust in LLMs with the
responsibility of discerning fact from fiction Lee et al. (2021); Guo et al. (2022); Wahle et al. (2022); Aggarwal et al.
(2020); Pelrine et al. (2021), ensuring their factuality and fairness becomes a central concern.
The impact of mis-/disinformation varies globally, influenced by factors like regional digital literacy and the strength
of local fact-checking ecosystems Mirza et al. (2023). Regions with lower digital literacy are often more susceptible
to misinformation, lacking robust mechanisms to critically assess and verify digital content. This susceptibility is

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

not just a matter of the technical capabilities of disinformation campaigns, but also the vulnerability of the targeted
population Mirza et al. (2023). Such disparities highlight the need for examining the performance of LLMs like the
GPT series across different regions. If these models are not finely attuned to regional variations, they risk exacerbating
existing informational inequities. Our study, therefore, delves into the geographic factuality variations of LLMs,
addressing a crucial aspect of how these technologies can either mitigate or amplify challenges in diverse information
ecosystems.
In this study, we utilize a comprehensive evaluation framework to assess how accurate the models are in aligning
with the true facts (“factuality”) in fact-checking tasks. Primarily, we focus our attention on two pivotal models,
GPT-3.5 Brown et al. (2020) and GPT-4 Bubeck et al. (2023). ChatGPT, the web interface chatbot serving GPT models,
reached 100 million users just two months after launching Milmo (2023). Despite its popularity, inconsistencies of
factuality in its responses, as exemplified in Figure 12 in Appendix G, have provided motivation for our research study.
We specifically look at GPT in the zero-shot classification setting (and not as a search-retrieval method that can use
online sources to detect factualness, e.g., Microsoft Bing Mehdi (2023)). We specifically examine a number of model
configurations for LLM-based fact-checking tasks, including analyzing the impact of forcing binary decisions (“true” or
“false”) on LLMs, proper temperature setting, as well as the model behavior in multiple runs with a given query. We
compared different versions of the GPT model series to evaluate performance across model updates. Furthermore, we
compared model performance over inputs from different geographic regions and time. For this purpose, we curated a
balanced dataset (n = 600), evenly distributed in terms of regions and labels and covering news and statements from
before and after the model training cutoff date.
Our findings present a nuanced picture. Notably, while GPT-4 exhibits superior performance over its predecessor,
GPT-3.5, its versions show inconsistent outcomes. The GPT-4 March release was notably more factually accurate
compared to its subsequent June iteration. Understandably, there was a marked decline in model accuracies for
information beyond their training span. We also observe notable performance disparities in LLMs based on geographic
origin, uncovering a concerning bias that privileges statements from the Global North (e.g. North America) over
those from the Global South (e.g. Africa). Such biases in computational systems can have far-reaching implications,
potentially exacerbating existing inequities and misinforming certain populations. This research is situated within a
global context, recognizing that the impacts of computational systems are not confined by geographical boundaries.
Our major contributions include:
1. We introduce Global-Liar, a geographically and temporally balanced dataset, paving the way for future
nuanced evaluations of LLMs. This dataset is a step towards mitigating geographic biases and promoting
global inclusivity in computational systems. We will make our curated dataset publicly available.
2. By analyzing the impact of a number of configuration settings for LLM-driven fact-checking, such as
forcing binary decisions, temperature configuration, and model reruns, our study sheds light on the nuanced
capabilities and limitations of LLMs in handling complex information, providing guidance on efficient and
scalable applications in real-world settings.
3. This study contributes a seminal analysis of LLM factuality performance disparities across global regions, with
a specific emphasis on contrasting outcomes between the Global North and the Global South. By quantitatively
uncovering these discrepancies, our research highlights the need for culturally aware and geographically
diverse model training and evaluation, vital for achieving equitable computational systems worldwide. This
contribution is pivotal in guiding future LLM advancements towards global fairness, ensuring equitable
technological benefits across diverse international contexts.

2

Methods

In this section, we outline our approach to evaluating OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models in fact-checking tasks.
We explain the choice of models under scrutiny (Section 2.1), our globally diverse dataset assembled for evaluation
(Section 2.2), prompt design and model configurations facilitating model interaction (Section 2.3), and the metrics
employed for a quantitative assessment (Section 2.4). This overview sets the stage for the following analysis of the
models’ fact-checking capabilities.
2.1

Models

This study endeavors to systematically evaluate the fact-checking performance of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models, which
constitute the core of OpenAI’s ChatGPT service. Due to ChatGPT’s widespread adoption among individual users and
businesses, understanding the performance drift of these models between different versions is of timely importance.
2

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

2.1.1

A P REPRINT

GPT-3.5-turbo Series

GPT-3.5-turbo stands as the most cost-effective model within the GPT series, exhibiting proficient performance in
traditional completion tasks. At the time of writing, two versions of GPT-3.5-turbo are available through the OpenAI
API, one from March 2023 (GPT-3.5-turbo-0301, shortened to gpt-3.5t-03 in plots) and the other from June 2023
(GPT-3.5-turbo-0613, shortened to gpt-3.5t-06). These versions show the models’ state at these specific times and
reflect any updates or improvements made by OpenAI. Additionally, GPT-3.5-turbo-16K is also accessible which has
the same capabilities as the standard GPT-3.5-turbo model but with 4 times the context. The June snapshot of this
model, GPT-3.5-turbo-16K-0601 (shortened to gpt-3.5t-16k-06), is also included in this evaluation.
2.1.2

GPT-4 Series

In March 2023, OpenAI introduced GPT-4, a successor to GPT-3.5. The increased model complexity of GPT-4
compared with previous versions is believed to bring significant performance improvement. In this study, we will
explore this claim in the context of fact-checking. At the time of writing, two principal versions of GPT-4 are available
through the OpenAI API, one snapshot taken in March 2023 (GPT-4-0314, shortened to gpt-4-03), and the other in June
2023 (GPT-4-0613, shortened to gpt-4-06), denoting the model’s evolutionary state at these respective time points.
All API queries in this study were executed within the timeframe spanning from July 2023 to October 2023. The
financial costs incurred for running queries on GPT-4 amounted to $435, which is approximately 13 times higher than
the cost incurred from querying the GPT-3 model ($33) for a similar amount of requests.
2.2

Dataset Curation

We curated a dataset of both true and false statements published before and after the OpenAI API training cutoff date
for the models in September 2021. This unique dataset called Global-Liar addresses two concerns: (1) the potential bias
from using datasets possibly employed in model fine-tuning, and (2) the Western-centric focus of existing datasets.
Our dataset aims for a fair assessment of the models’ fact-checking performance and broadens the evaluation scope to
include six global regions: Africa, Asia-Pacific, Europe, Latin America, North America, and the Middle East, with 100
statements from each region. In our analysis, we use Global South to mean the Africa, Latin America, and the Middle
East regions and Global North to mean North America, Europe, and Asia-Pacific regions, although we note that the
latter also includes a number of countries from both regions.
To achieve a balanced analysis, our dataset maintains an equal number of true and false statements. False statements
were sourced from AFP FactCheck1 , selecting statements that could be analyzed without the need for additional context,
such as images or videos. In the Latin America region, nearly half of the examples were translated from Portuguese2
and Spanish3 by a fluent speaker due to a scarcity of valid statements in English.
True statements were derived from reputable news outlets in the respective regions, specifically from newspapers
ranking high on the International Media and Newspapers list4 . These statements, extracted from high-quality sources,
served as the ground truth for true statements.
We provide data spanning both before and after the model’s training cutoff date in September 2021. Ensuring equilibrium
with this pivotal date, our dataset features 300 statements from each side of the timeline. Additionally, both data subsets
are evenly distributed in terms of regions and labels.
We plan to make our dataset publicly available alongside this paper to aid the community in conducting evaluations on
a dataset balanced for regions, labels, and time frames.
2.3

Prompt Design and Model Configurations

Prompts serve as the interface through which the models receive input and, consequently, the clarity, neutrality, and
specificity of prompts can significantly impact the models’ output. In our study, we carefully crafted prompts to be
clear, unbiased, and relevant to fact-checking. Each prompt aimed to elicit factual responses from the models without
leading them toward any particular answer.
1

https://factcheck.afp.com
https://checamos.afp.com/
3
https://factual.afp.com/
4
4imn is an international directory for newspapers, accessible at https://www.4imn.com/about/
2

3

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Listing 1: Prompt used for querying models.

Role: I need you to assume the role of a professional fact checker with an experience of 10+ years.
You will fact-check a statement.
Task: For given statement, delimited by triple backticks, rate it for truthfulness.
Response Format: ‘false’, ‘true’, or ‘unclear’ (no context or explanations).
Now, let’s get to task. Here is the statement: {text}

2.3.1

Verdict Categories

With a given input statement, a natural output required from the model for fact-checking is to ask it to produce a “true”
or “false” label. In our following evaluation, however, in addition to the “true” and “false” labels, our prompt allows
the language model to output an “unclear” verdict for instances where it lacks confidence in leaning towards either
side. Listing 1 provides a succinct version of the prompt used in our main experiment. This choice is based on our
experiment (Section 3.2.5) which shows that allowing the “unclear” verdict makes the models perform better.
2.3.2

Prompt Rerun

In order to evaluate the stability of model response, for each statement we prompt the model five times and record all
responses for subsequent analysis. When evaluating the factuality of the model, we use the mode response of each
statement as the consensus verdict. Our aim is to mitigate the potential inconsistencies in individual runs and derive a
more stable and reliable prediction.
2.3.3

Temperature Setting

Temperature is a parameter that controls the randomness of response from the GPT models. We set the temperature to
zero for subsequent analysis to ensure models perform most stably. This choice is supported by our analysis comparing
model performance over different temperature values - lower temperature value understandably makes the model more
stable and precise (Appendix B).
2.3.4

Post-Processing

Due to models’ tendencies to deviate from instructions and generate non-conforming responses, they were instructed to
provide only a verdict, foregoing any detailed rationales for their decision. Nonetheless, post-processing was requisite in
a few instances to ensure precise response categorization. Initially, special characters are removed and text is converted
to lowercase for uniformity. Known prefixes or suffixes are then removed from labels. A dictionary of corrections is
utilized to map various labels to accepted terms: “false”, “true”, or “unclear”. If a label does not match predefined
corrections, fuzzy matching is employed to find the closest match among the accepted labels, enhancing the accuracy
and consistency of response categorization for precise analysis.
2.4

Metrics

In our evaluation framework, we focus on two dimensions: stability and factuality. Stability assesses the model’s
consistency across the five rerun iterations, while factuality gauges its alignment with the ground truth. These
dimensions, explored through specific metrics, provide a nuanced understanding of the model’s performance in
fact-checking scenarios.
2.4.1

Stability

Consistency in verdicts across multiple evaluations enhances the reliability of LLMs, which in turn, fosters user trust —
a critical aspect for the practical deployment of automated fact-checking systems. Our ad-hoc experimentation with
the ChatGPT web interface (cf. Figure 12 in Appendix G) suggests that one-shot metrics may fall short in providing
a comprehensive evaluation. A model that exhibits low stability might give inconsistent verdicts, undermining its
reliability in discerning factual accuracy. To rigorously assess stability in this context, we employ the Mode Frequency
metric.
4

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Mode Frequency: Given a statement and its set of predictions from multiple runs of the LLM, the mode frequency
quantifies the most commonly occurring verdict. For a given statement s:
# occurrences of mode verdict
MF =
(1)
# total predictions
Subsequently, to obtain a holistic view of the model’s behavior, the mode frequencies of individual statements can be
aggregated to provide an average mode frequency for the entire LLM model:
P
Mode Frequency
Average MF = s∈S
,
(2)
|S|
where S represents the set of all evaluated statements. This average mode frequency offers insights into the typical
consensus level the LLM model exhibits across its predictions. A higher value suggests that, on average, the model
tends to converge more frequently on a particular verdict for each statement, indicating a stronger predictive consistency.
Label Switching: In the context of fact-checking with language models, understanding how temperature modulation
affects verdicts is crucial. To this end, we quantify the instances where the model’s verdict alternates between temperature
transitions. Frequent label switching highlights the model’s sensitivity to temperature alterations, suggesting potential
verdict variability.
2.4.2

Factuality

The accuracy with which a model can determine the factuality of a statement is crucial to its utility in real-world
applications. For each statement, the LLM provides a set of verdicts across five runs. We use the “mode" verdict (the
most frequent prediction among these runs) as the model’s output verdict. In cases of tied verdict frequencies, we
default to the verdict given by the model in its first run. To rigorously evaluate the capability of LLMs in fact-checking,
we adopt the following classical metrics:
Accuracy computes the proportion of statements for which the model’s verdict aligns with the ground truth.
Precision evaluates the fraction of statements classified as true that are indeed factual. It gives insight into the reliability
of a model’s positive verdicts.
Recall determines the proportion of factual statements that the model correctly identifies. It indicates the model’s
coverage of true statements.
F1 Score provides a balanced measure of a model’s precision and recall capabilities.
Certainty Rate: The Certainty Rate metric is designed to penalize instances when the model neither confidently selects
a “true” nor “false” verdict in a 3/5 majority across model runs. Specifically, this lack of convergence signifies the
model’s indecisiveness or inability to determine the factuality of a statement. Two primary scenarios contribute to this
uncertainty:
1. The model outputs an “unclear” verdict, underscoring its hesitancy in factuality judgment.
2. The model’s verdicts are split, failing to reach a 3/5 majority for either “true”, “false”, or “unclear”.
The Certainty Rate is calculated as the proportion of statements for which the model outputs a “clear” mode verdict
over the total number of statements evaluated:

1 X 0 if Ti < 3 and Fi < 3
UR total =
(3)
1 otherwise
|S|
s∈S

where Ti and Fi represent the number of times the model selects a “true” and “false” verdict, respectively, for the ith
statement.
A lower Certainty Rate may reflect a model’s cautiousness or lack of information to make a definite judgment, while a
higher rate may indicate a model’s readiness to commit to a verdict, whether “true” or “false”. This metric provides
insight into the model’s ability to handle ambiguous or insufficient information and its readiness to admit uncertainty,
which is crucial for applications where acknowledging the lack of clarity is as important as providing accurate verdicts.

3

Model Stability and Factuality Results

In this section, we consider model consistency and factuality measured across a set of metrics to investigate the
performance of GPT models in the fact-checking scenario. Figure 1 provides an overview of the performance of each of
5

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Figure 1: Performance metrics across different models for three main temperature values. Across almost all metrics,
GPT-4 March consistently outperforms other models. The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating
before the training cutoff date of Sep 2021. Results for other temperatures are provided in the Appendix B (Figure 3).
the GPT models across different stability and factuality metrics. Overall we hope our findings will be instrumental in
informing when and how to use a large language model to evaluate veracity in the context of misinformation.
3.1

Stability

Stability refers to how consistently the LLMs give the same verdicts when evaluating the same statement (prompt)
multiple times. This form of stability is one important component for trusting the model’s responses in fact-checking
related tasks. In this part of our analysis, we use Mode Frequency and Label Switching to assess stability.
3.1.1

Mode Frequency

With a temperature value of zero, all GPT model versions maintain a high level of mode frequency (Figure 1), suggesting
consistent behavior. We include in Appendix B (Figure 7(a)) an analysis of model consistency decay with increasing
temperature. While all models show some decline in mode frequency, the rate and extent of this decline vary (cf.
Figure 7(a)). Both GPT-4 models (March and June versions) maintain a relatively stable mode frequency across the
observed range. They show the highest results in terms of high mode frequency and exhibit minimal fluctuation,
suggesting consistent behavior. Notably, the June snapshots of both GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-3.5-turbo-16K demonstrate
the most pronounced decline in mode frequency across the observed temperature range. Interestingly, the GPT-3.5
March version is comparable in stability to its GPT-4 counterpart.
3.1.2

Label Switching

To further understand the variability in prediction behaviors among different GPT models, we evaluate switching counts
in response to temperature changes in Figure 7(b) in Appendix B. Switching counts refer to the number of statements
for which a model alters its output prediction when moving from one temperature value to another. Most models exhibit
an increase in switching counts as temperature transitions increase, suggesting that as temperature rises, models tend to
switch their predictions more frequently. The June versions of GPT-3.5 exhibit heightened sensitivity, while others
maintain a more steady output.
Summary: Based on the analyses in Figures 1 and 7, with temperature value of zero, all GPT models are able to achieve
consistency across multiple runs for a given statement.
3.2

Factuality

How well an LLM can tell if a statement is true or not is critical for its real-world deployment. This part of the analysis
reports insights on the models’ ability to discern the veracity of statements. We analyze their strengths and limitations
through multiple viewpoints: First, we look at Certainty Rate to understand when the model does not predict a “true” or
“false” majority, counting “unclear” as wrong predictions. We next dive into other metrics such as Accuracy, Precision,
6

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Table 1: Model Analysis Summary. The columns “Unclear True” and “Unclear False” denote instances where “true”
and “false” statements, respectively, have been classified as “unclear” by the models. The temperature setting is 0. The
dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021.
Unclear
False
Model Name
True False Total Positive Negative
GPT-3.5 March
GPT-3.5 June
GPT-4 March
GPT-4 June
GPT-3.5-16K June

9
15
9
42
14

57
45
19
12
46

66
60
28
54
60

32
39
27
21
37

0
1
0
1
3

and Recall. Lastly, we evaluate different settings such as Singular versus Majority Rule Inference and Uncertainty
versus Factual Determination.
3.2.1

Certainty Rate

The Certainty Rate represents the proportion of statements for which the model achieved a 3/5 majority decision
for either “true” or “false” verdicts (cf. Table 1). A lower certainty rate suggests that a model frequently opts for
a contradictory or “unclear” classification. The June snapshot of GPT-4 has a pronounced count of true statements
marked as “unclear” (42), indicating that this model tends to be more conservative or cautious in its predictions,
potentially to avoid false positives. Indeed, this model has the least number (21) of false positives. The GPT-3.5 March
version marks a notably high 57 false statements as “unclear”, suggesting it often opts for a non-committal stance even
when statements are false. On the other end, the GPT-4 March and June versions have the lowest counts, 19 and 12
respectively. These models are less hesitant in making definitive judgments on false statements.
Summing the “Unclear True” and “Unclear False” values provides a holistic view of each model’s overall uncertainty.
From this perspective, the GPT-3.5 March version exhibits the highest combined uncertainty with a total of 66 unclear
verdicts, while the GPT-4 March displays the least with a combined count of 28. Additional details, including particular
examples of model-marked uncertain statements, are provided in Appendix E.
3.2.2

Accuracy

Figure 1 provides insights into the effectiveness of various GPT models in fact-checking tasks. The GPT-4 March model
achieves the best accuracy (∼80%) irrespective of temperature fluctuations. It is followed by GPT-4 June (∼74%) and
GPT-3.5 March (∼68%) that maintain stable accuracy across temperatures, with only slight fluctuations. In contrast,
the GPT-3.5 June models exhibit a more pronounced decrease as temperature rises. Figure 4 in Appendix B provides
insights into the effectiveness of various GPT models in fact-checking tasks across different temperature settings.
False positives refer to situations where incorrect statements are mistakenly identified as true by the model, while false
negatives denote instances where accurate statements are wrongly flagged as false. The findings in Table 1 represent
a significant concern: the models demonstrate a pronounced tendency to misclassify false facts as true, indicating a
bias in their verdicts. Such a predisposition towards false positives is alarming from a fact-checking standpoint, as it
might propagate misinformation. Appendix F (Table 9) shows the nine false positives statements mislabeled by all five
models. Intriguingly, there is a stark rarity of false negatives, meaning that the models infrequently label genuine truths
as false. This can likely be attributed to our data collection methodology. By sourcing true statements from reputable,
high-impact newspapers, it is plausible that many of these facts were already integrated into the model’s training data,
especially if they were published before the cutoff date.
3.2.3

Precision, Recall

The March GPT-4 model performs best across both metrics — precision and recall (cf. Figure 1). In terms of precision,
the June GPT-4 model performs visibly worse, meaning newer iterations of the model do not necessarily improve the
factuality of the models. When considering recall, while both GPT-4 variants outperform their counterparts, a nuanced
difference emerges between them. Specifically, the March iteration registers a superior recall rate. The relatively low
recall of the GPT-4 June version is attributed to its cautious approach to opt for “unclear” verdicts for statements that
are in fact “true” (cf. column “Unclear True” in Table 1). Thus, the model is missing a significant number of true
statements.
7

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Table 2: F1 scores comparing model performance under different inference rules and prompt instruction settings. The
temperature setting is 0. The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating before the training cutoff
date of Sep 2021.
Inference Rule
Prompt Instruction
Model Name
Majority Vote First Prediction Two-Label Three-Label
GPT-3.5 March
GPT-3.5 June
GPT-4 March
GPT-4 June
GPT-3.5-16K June

48.38%
47.93%
56.86%
54.76%
48.01%

48.38%
47.50%
56.66%
55.29%
47.59%

59.26%
53.66%
77.78%
72.46%
-

89.81%
87.01%
91.26%
90.68%
-

For the analysis in Figure 1 (and Figure 5 in Appendix B), we treat uncertain statements as incorrect (i.e., the majority
“unclear” label assigned by an LLM differs from ground truth). Additionally, for an evaluation of models on statements
with definitive majority verdicts (“true” or “false”), we report the analysis in detail in Figure 6 in Appendix B.
3.2.4

Inference Rule: Singular Prediction versus Majority Vote

To understand if multiple runs of the model improve the factuality of its verdicts, we evaluate the models using majority
voting versus a one-shot prediction setting. For majority rule inference, we only consider a prediction correct if it has a
majority of at least three votes across the five repetitions. Querying the model multiple times has barely any effect on
factuality (cf. columns under "Inference Rule" in Table 2).
Figure 8 in Appendix B further demonstrates that querying the model multiple times does not improve factuality at low
temperatures in the range of 0.0 − 1.0. At higher temperatures, the Majority Voting based on five predictions generally
yields better F1 scores in comparison to querying the model once (First Prediction) across different GPT versions and
temperature settings. There is a marked drop in factuality for single predictions when temperature transitions from
1.5 to 2.0. The only exception is GPT-4 June snapshot, where both First Prediction and Majority Vote produce nearly
equivalent results, even at higher temperatures, such as 2.0.
In summary, singular inference is as factual as majority rule inference for lower temperature settings. The practice of
querying the model multiple times and adopting a majority voting strategy enhances the factuality of the outcomes only
at high temperatures.
3.2.5

Prompt Instruction: Uncertainty vs. Forced Factual Determination – A Three- vs. Two-Label
Comparison

To analyze the effect of prompting the model with the option of an “unclear” label, we repeat our experiment while
forcing it to make a factual determination. We change the response format options to “true” or “false” as opposed to
three options (“true”, “false” or “unclear”). This “binary” group of models correctly predicts a majority of “true" or
“false" for 99.4% of all statements, other than 39 occurrences of “NA” which we consider as being a wrong label when
evaluating performance. We exclude the gpt-3.5t-16k-06 version due to time constraints.
We consider a subset of the data comprised of statements where the majority predicted label is either “true” or “false”,
calculated independently for each of our original models and temperatures. We call this the “Baseline Set" and its
complement is the “Unclear Set". Table 2 shows the difference in average F1 score between the binary models on the
Unclear Set and the original models on the Baseline Set. We include accuracy, precision, and recall in Appendix D
(Figure 11). The binary prompt instruction models consistently underperform our baseline, especially for the GPT-3.5
family which averages a 32% lower F1 score.
Our results indicate that forcing the model to make a decision has no performance gains and practitioners should instead
treat unclear labels as a class of its own.
Summary: Our results show that the GPT models change their behavior over model versions in surprising ways.
Specifically, when comparing the March and June versions, GPT-4 exhibits a drop in performance due to its tendency
to label a large number of positive examples as unclear. While these results indicate that it is hard to give general
guidelines due to differences in behaviors, our results do showcase some generalities: The most cost-effective method
of performing fact-checking with GPT is with a single inference while not forcing a binary prompt as it does not lead to
a performance improvement.
8

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

4

A P REPRINT

Regional and Temporal Results

Next, we seek to understand the performance of GPT models across multiple variables. Understanding how they perform
across different global regions and time frames gives us insight into the barriers and opportunities for democratizing
access to misinformation mitigation strategies.
4.1

Regional Analysis

The disparity between the Global North and Global South is evident in Table 3. The Global North’s accuracy is
significantly higher in both models and all time periods, with an average gap of 14%. This suggests that models may be
better attuned to the data characteristics prevalent in the Global North, potentially due to a larger representation in the
training datasets or more extensive research and development focus in these regions.
When breaking down the data by specific regions, North America consistently achieves the highest accuracy rates,
peaking at 96% with GPT-4 in March. The lowest regional accuracies are observed in Africa, with a drastic drop to 48%
in the GPT-4 June iteration. Latin America and the Middle East, while showing improvements from GPT-3.5 to GPT-4
in March, still exhibit moderate accuracy rates. These improvements suggest positive strides in model performance but
also highlight the need for continued efforts to bridge the accuracy gap.
As for performance over time, both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models show variations in performance from March to June,
with GPT-4 generally showing improved accuracy in March compared to GPT-3.5. GPT-4’s performance in June dips
compared to its March version, which may raise questions about the iterative model update process. GPT-4 (March)
outperforms all other model iterations, with the highest accuracy rates in nearly all regions.
Our analysis proceeds with the fitting of two logistic regression models to evaluate the accuracy of the GPT model
versions, taking into account regional differences and temporal variations. Treating instances where the model output
was "unclear" as incorrect, we employed the entire dataset, inclusive of individual reruns for each statement, to serve
as the foundation for our predictive modeling. The first logistic regression model delineates individual regions as
standalone categories, providing insights into the region-specific performance of each GPT model iteration. Details
of this model are presented in Appendix A, with Table 4 offering a complete overview of the model, and Table 5
enumerating the estimated coefficients. The second model consolidates the regions into two broader categories—Global
North and Global South—thus allowing us to examine the disparities on a global scale. This grouping strategy aims
to distill the overarching trends that transcend individual regional peculiarities, and the findings are meticulously
documented in the same Appendix, within Table 6 for the model summary and Table 7 for the coefficients.
Logistic regression analyses reveal statistically significant geographic disparities in model performances. In individual
region assessments and aggregated global categorizations, the Global South exhibits a marked underperformance when
contrasted with the Global North. Specifically, regions such as North America and Europe perform better than the
reference, Asia-Pacific, whereas Africa, Latin America, and the Middle East lag significantly behind, as indicated by
their negative coefficients and statistical significance (p ≤ 0.01). The grouped analysis (cf. Table 6 and Table 7) further
corroborates these findings, where the Global South’s negative coefficient of -0.4539 (p < 0.001) starkly contrasts

Table 3: Accuracy Results Across Regions. Unclear label counted as wrong. The temperature setting is 0. Minimum
accuracy results per model are highlighted in bold. The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating
prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021.
GPT 3.5
GPT 4
Region
Total
March
June
March
June
Africa
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Latin America
Middle East
North America

62%
70%
72%
57%
57%
84%

60%
76%
64%
62%
62%
76%

64%
82%
86%
86%
76%
96%

48%
82%
78%
76%
76%
88%

58%
77%
75%
70%
68%
86%

Global North
Global South

75.3%
58.6%

72.0%
61.3%

88.0%
75.3%

82.6%
66.6%

79.3%
65.3%

Total

67.3%

66.6%

81.6%

74.6%

-

9

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Figure 2: Performance metrics across different models for temperature value 0. A marked decline in performance for
post-cutoff period input is observed. Results for other temperatures in the Appendix B (Figure 3).
against the Global North, underscoring the pervasive underperformance across this aggregate. The substantial z-scores
associated with these coefficients confirm the robustness of these disparities.
In summary, there is a clear indication of geographic disparities in model performance, with the Global North,
particularly North America, receiving the most benefit from model accuracies. Regions such as Africa and the Middle
East are at a disadvantage, with much lower accuracy, pointing to the need for more representative training datasets.
Additionally, the performance fluctuations over time for all regions suggest that model updates may not consistently
benefit all areas equally, which is an important consideration for the ongoing development and deployment of LLMs.
4.2

Data Beyond Training Span

At the time of the study, the GPT models were trained using data up until September 2021. We assessed their factual
proficiency on a curated dataset from a subsequent period, comprising the same number (300) of statements. This
was compared against performance metrics from datasets preceding this cutoff date. As depicted in Figure 2, there
is a marked decline in accuracy for post-September’21 data, which is evident for all model versions. Interestingly,
the performance hierarchy among models is influenced by the dataset’s temporal context. The 16K June version of
GPT-3.5 displays comparable accuracy to the GPT-4 March iteration, as evidenced in Figure 2. Such an equivalence
was not observed with data from before September 2021. Most strikingly, the GPT-4 June model, the latest in the series,
experiences the most pronounced accuracy slump for post-cutoff data, underperforming against most of its predecessors.
As detailed in Appendix C, we observe an increase in the number of unclear verdicts (Figure 9). The model stability
worsens, as evidenced by lower mode frequency (Figure 10).
The statistical evidence from our logistic regression models accentuates the temporal constraints impacting the GPT
models’ performance. As indicated in Table 5 and Table 7, the coefficient for the post-cutoff variable (C(post cutoff)[T.1])
is significantly negative, -0.6927 and -0.6899 respectively, with p-values effectively at zero. This strong negative
coefficient points to a marked decrease in model accuracy for statements that emerged after the training cutoff date. The
consistent underperformance of models beyond their training period serves to dispel the notion of their performance
being a product of chance, instead underscoring the importance of deliberate and specialized training.

5

Discussion

Next, we discuss lessons learned, acknowledge limitations, and outline directions for future research.
5.1

Lessons Learned

The disparity in model performance underscores the critical need for diverse datasets in AI training. The underrepresentation of the Global South, a region already grappling with rising misinformation, points to a significant bias in data
sources. Enriching future models with training data from these underrepresented areas is not only a matter of fairness
but also a necessity for building globally competent fact-checking tools.
10

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

The evolving nature of information landscapes makes fairness a moving target in AI. As seen in the varying performances
across regions over time, models that are fair at one point may not remain so unless continually updated and reassessed.
Our findings also stress the importance of continuous evaluation and adaptation of AI models to ensure they remain
accurate, relevant, and fair across diverse global contexts.
The suboptimal factuality performance of the latest snapshots of foundation models necessitates a critical examination
of determinants underpinning LLMs’ efficacy in fact-checking. There exists a potential trade-off in model training:
as LLMs become specialized in certain domains, their proficiency in others, like fact-checking, may wane. Such
disparities emphasize the need for task-specific evaluations and iterative refinements, ensuring that broad capabilities do
not undermine domain-specific expertise.
For scalable fact-checking, economic and time efficiency are important considerations. Our study across different
model versions and comparison between single inference and majority voting suggest that it is possible to achieve better
fact-checking performance with lower cost - the latest model is not always better performing, and that a single inference
with low temperature can achieve performance comparable to multiple queries.
Forcing models strictly towards binary decisions, “true” or “false”, can often diminish its capacity to grasp the subtleties
inherent in certain statements. This limitation becomes evident when we overlook the valuable middle ground that the
“unclear” label offers. Fact-checking is complex, with many statements resisting simple categorizations and models
often lacking the appropriate context. Forcing definitive verdicts, our findings suggest, can compromise the accuracy
and reliability of the models. Hence, for practitioners, it might be more judicious to view the “unclear” label not as an
inconvenience, but as a distinct, meaningful classification that acknowledges and navigates the intricacies of real-world
information.
5.2

Limitations & Future Work

Our findings are limited to OpenAI’s GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 series. We have also looked into the LLaMA series developed
by Meta, as well as the Dolly 2.0 series developed by Databricks. However, despite the prompt engineering efforts in
our experiments, these LLMs are unable to generate enough quality responses for our analysis purpose. This highlights
the challenges faced in extending our research to the broader LLM product universe and comparing their behaviors.
We also focus on the binary fact-checking problem and do not investigate how systems may use LLMs to combat
misinformation through model-generated explanations or requesting it to provide corroborative resources. While
misinformation may come in many different formats, we focus on evaluating only textual claims. Furthermore, we focus
on the quality of the generated labels and not how a user might perceive them. Prior research has shown that trust in AI
systems depends on a wide range of factors including meta-information, system design, and personal factors DeVerna
et al. (2023). Future work can be done to investigate how LLMs interact with users in fact-checking and how personal
factors affect the behavior or performance of LLMs in such tasks. We also note that these models have the capability to
generate misinformation, reducing trust and potentially being more harmful than good.
Lastly, while great care went into the production of our curated dataset, biases can exist in annotations by human
evaluators. For the Latin America region false-statements specifically, nearly half of them were required to be translated
by a fluent speaker in Portuguese or Spanish due to a lack of English content from AFP. Nevertheless, we believe our
dataset remains a valuable resource for evaluating performance across diverse regions. Future research should look
at the democratization of fact-checking across the world, especially in lower-resource languages. We also encourage
future work to investigate other models and types of misinformation, including visual/multi-modality instances.

6

Related Work

The recent advances in LLMs, and especially the GPT model series, have been studied for many NLP tasks such as text
summarization Yang et al. (2023); Wei et al. (2023), entity recognition Omar et al. (2023); Hu et al. (2023), and question
and answering Katz et al. (2023); OpenAI (2023); Huh (2023); Qin et al. (2023). While impressive, these models are not
immune to limitations and may raise their own problems. OpenAI has warned, “GPT-4 ’hallucinates’ facts and makes
reasoning errors” to some extent, although to a lesser degree than its predecessor, GPT-3.5 OpenAI (2023). Alongside
the advancements in NLP, there is a growing concern over the impact of digital misinformationLewandowsky et al.
(2017). The last few years have seen its proliferation into subjects such as climate change Biddlestone et al. (2022);
van der Linden et al. (2017), vaccination and COVID-19 Vidgen et al. (2021); He et al. (2023). The capabilities of
LLMs raise important questions about their role as both a mitigator and a generator of misinformation.
Automated Fact Checking & LLMs. ChatGPT has been used for examining both vaccination and cancer misconceptions Deiana et al. (2023); Johnson et al. (2023), both finding it provides generally accurate information. Prior
11

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

work Hoes et al. (2023) has analyzed ChatGPT’s performance for fact-checking using an open Politifact dataset. They
find the model agrees with one of the six original labels less than 30% of the time and 68.28% when considering
the dichotomous case after merging labels. The source of the information can add up to 10 percentage points to
the classification with blogs and campaigns being the best and worst categories with 77.7% and 64.0% accuracy,
respectively. ChatGPT was best at classifying examples related to COVID-19 (82.1%) and worse at government-related
(63.8%) claims. The authors also find the model performs similarly regardless if the data was before its training-data
cutoff time or in the 10 months following.
Stability & Role of Temperature. Alizadeh et al. Alizadeh et al. (2023) studied the performance of ChatGPT, opensource LLM, and crowd workers in both the zero-shot and few-shot learning settings. They compare the default values
(1.0 for ChatGPT and 0.9 for other LLMs on HuggingChat5 ) with the lower value of 0.2. They find that ChatGPT
is less affected by learning setting and temperature combination, providing generally good performance all around
while lower temperatures performed better for LLMs on HuggingChat. Other work has found that for text-annotation
tasks, “a lower temperature increases consistency without decreasing accuracy” Gilardi et al. (2023). Ye et al. Ye et al.
(2023) studied the capabilities of GPT-3/-3.5 models on several NLU tasks, finding that more modern models do not
necessarily lead to improvements across all tasks.
Others. Huang et al Huang et al. (2023) studied ChatGPT’s text generation abilities for classifying and justifying the
detection of Hate Speech. They find the model often makes use of an “unclear” label even when prompted to give a
binary answer and these instances correlate with the more implicit/subtle examples. ChatGPT has also been shown to be
able to evaluate the credibility of news sources with ratings that correlate with human expert judgments, even in the face
of non-English and satirical content Yang and Menczer (2023). Fine-tuned models based on the earlier open-sourced
GPT-2 have been shown to generate better corrective messages than those generated by humans He et al. (2023). Other
work DeVerna et al. (2023) has looked at the effectiveness of ChatGPT not just on performance but on belief and sharing
intent of political U.S. news stories on social media style websites. When presented with a model-generated long-form
textual explanation of a news headline, the authors find that while the model can accurately detect false content it has
small or negative effects on sharing intent when compared to the control group, highlighting its ineffectiveness as
an intervention against misinformation. The general effectiveness of warning labels has been questioned regardless
of whether its human or AI-generated, as it may be inefficient Pantazi et al. (2018) or have unexpected adverse
effects Pennycook et al. (2020), while other works indicate it may inoculate against false content van der Linden et al.
(2017). The correction of misinformation has also been studied in connection to social ties Malhotra and Pearce (2022);
Malhotra et al. (2022), where technological approaches have been questioned regarding their usefulness Scott et al.
(2023).

7

Conclusion

This study’s examination of GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 models reveals significant disparities in factual accuracy and biases,
particularly disadvantaging the Global South. The introduction of the ’Global-Liar’ dataset underscores the need for
geographically diverse data in AI training. Our findings challenge the assumption that newer model iterations invariably
yield better accuracy and highlight a crucial bias toward the Global North. The observed bias in favor of the Global
North underscores a significant concern: existing AI models may perpetuate informational inequities, making the
inclusion of underrepresented regions in AI training a priority. Furthermore, our exploration into the impact of binary
decision settings and temperature variations on model performance offers practical insights for the effective application
of LLMs in diverse settings. These insights stress the importance of inclusive and representative training for LLMs to
ensure global fairness. As AI continues to influence information dissemination, this research advocates for a concerted
effort toward developing AI systems that are equitable and effective across diverse global communities.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an NYU 19 Washington Square North Faculty Fellowship and by the Center for Cyber
Security at New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD).

References
Akshay Aggarwal, Aniruddha Chauhan, Deepika Kumar, Sharad Verma, and Mamta Mittal. 2020. Classification of fake
news by fine-tuning deep bidirectional transformers based language model. EAI Endorsed Transactions on Scalable
Information Systems 7, 27 (2020), e10–e10.
5

https://huggingface.co/chat/

12

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Meysam Alizadeh, Maël Kubli, Zeynab Samei, Shirin Dehghani, Juan Diego Bermeo, Maria Korobeynikova, and
Fabrizio Gilardi. 2023. Open-Source Large Language Models Outperform Crowd Workers and Approach ChatGPT
in Text-Annotation Tasks. arXiv:2307.02179 [cs.CL]
Mikey Biddlestone, Flavio Azevedo, and Sander van der Linden. 2022. Climate of conspiracy: A meta-analysis of the
consequences of belief in conspiracy theories about climate change. Current Opinion in Psychology 46 (Aug. 2022),
101390. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2022.101390
Alexandre Bovet and Hernán A Makse. 2019. Influence of fake news in Twitter during the 2016 US presidential election.
Nature communications 10, 1 (2019), 7.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan,
Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in
neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat
Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 (2023).
Kevin Matthe Caramancion. 2020. An exploration of disinformation as a cybersecurity threat. In 2020 3rd International
Conference on Information and Computer Technologies (ICICT). IEEE, 440–444.
Giovanna Deiana, Marco Dettori, Antonella Arghittu, Antonio Azara, Giovanni Gabutti, and Paolo Castiglia. 2023.
Artificial Intelligence and Public Health: Evaluating ChatGPT Responses to Vaccination Myths and Misconceptions.
Vaccines 11, 7 (2023), 1217.
Matthew R. DeVerna, Harry Yaojun Yan, Kai-Cheng Yang, and Filippo Menczer. 2023. Artificial intelligence is ineffective and potentially harmful for fact checking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10800 (2023). arXiv:2308.10800 [cs.HC]
Fabrizio Gilardi, Meysam Alizadeh, and Maël Kubli. 2023. Chatgpt outperforms crowd-workers for text-annotation
tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15056 (2023).
David Robert Grimes. 2021. Medical disinformation and the unviable nature of COVID-19 conspiracy theories. PLoS
One 16, 3 (2021), e0245900.
Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vlachos. 2022. A survey on automated fact-checking. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics 10 (2022), 178–206.
Bing He, Mustaque Ahamad, and Srijan Kumar. 2023. Reinforcement Learning-Based Counter-Misinformation
Response Generation: A Case Study of COVID-19 Vaccine Misinformation. In Proceedings of the ACM Web
Conference 2023 (Austin, TX, USA) (WWW ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
2698–2709. https://doi.org/10.1145/3543507.3583388
Emma Hoes, Sacha Altay, and Juan Bermeo. 2023. Leveraging ChatGPT for Efficient Fact-Checking. PsyArXiv
preprint (2023).
Yan Hu, Iqra Ameer, Xu Zuo, Xueqing Peng, Yujia Zhou, Zehan Li, Yiming Li, Jianfu Li, Xiaoqian Jiang, and Hua
Xu. 2023. Zero-shot Clinical Entity Recognition using ChatGPT. (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.
2303.16416
Fan Huang, Haewoon Kwak, and Jisun An. 2023. Is chatgpt better than human annotators? potential and limitations of
chatgpt in explaining implicit hate speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07736 (2023).
Sun Huh. 2023. Are ChatGPT’s knowledge and interpretation ability comparable to those of medical students in Korea
for taking a parasitology examination?: a descriptive study. Journal of Educational Evaluation for Health Professions
20 (Jan. 2023). https://doi.org/10.3352/jeehp.2023.20.1
Skyler B Johnson, Andy J King, Echo L Warner, Sanjay Aneja, Benjamin H Kann, and Carma L Bylund. 2023. Using
ChatGPT to evaluate cancer myths and misconceptions: artificial intelligence and cancer information. JNCI cancer
spectrum 7, 2 (2023), pkad015.
Daniel Martin Katz, Michael James Bommarito, Shang Gao, and Pablo Arredondo. 2023. GPT-4 Passes the Bar Exam.
SSRN Electronic Journal (2023). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4389233
Nayeon Lee, Yejin Bang, Andrea Madotto, Madian Khabsa, and Pascale Fung. 2021. Towards few-shot fact-checking
via perplexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09535 (2021).
Stephan Lewandowsky, Ullrich K. H. Ecker, and John Cook. 2017. Beyond misinformation: Understanding and
coping with the “post-truth” era. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition 6, 4 (Dec. 2017), 353–369.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jarmac.2017.07.008
13

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Pranav Malhotra and Katy Pearce. 2022. Facing Falsehoods: Strategies for Polite Misinformation Correction. International Journal of Communication 16, 0 (April 2022), 22. https://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/
view/18361
Pranav Malhotra, Kristina Scharp, and Lindsey Thomas. 2022. The meaning of misinformation and those who correct
it: An extension of relational dialectics theory. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 39, 5 (May 2022),
1256–1276. https://doi.org/10.1177/02654075211050429
Yusuf Mehdi. 2023. Reinventing search with a new AI-powered Microsoft Bing and Edge, your copilot for the web.
Dan Milmo. 2023. CHATGPT reaches 100 million users two months after launch. https://www.theguardian.
com/technology/2023/feb/02/chatgpt-100-million-users-open-ai-fastest-growing-app
Shujaat Mirza, Labeeba Begum, Liang Niu, Sarah Pardo, Azza Abouzied, Paolo Papotti, and Christina Pöpper. 2023.
Tactics, threats & targets: Modeling disinformation and its mitigation. In ISOC Network and Distributed Systems
Security Symposium (NDSS).
Reham Omar, Omij Mangukiya, Panos Kalnis, and Essam Mansour. 2023. ChatGPT versus Traditional Question
Answering for Knowledge Graphs: Current Status and Future Directions Towards Knowledge Graph Chatbots.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06466v1
OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774v3
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini
Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human
feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 27730–27744.
Myrto Pantazi, Mikhail Kissine, and Olivier Klein. 2018. The power of the truth bias: False information affects
memory and judgment even in the absence of distraction. Social Cognition 36, 2 (2018), 167–198. https:
//doi.org/10.1521/soco.2018.36.2.167
Justin Paul, Akiko Ueno, and Charles Dennis. 2023. ChatGPT and consumers: Benefits, pitfalls and future research
agenda. , 1213–1225 pages.
Kellin Pelrine, Jacob Danovitch, and Reihaneh Rabbany. 2021. The surprising performance of simple baselines for
misinformation detection. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021. 3432–3441.
Gordon Pennycook, Adam Bear, Evan T. Collins, and David G. Rand. 2020. The Implied Truth Effect: Attaching
Warnings to a Subset of Fake News Headlines Increases Perceived Accuracy of Headlines Without Warnings.
Management Science 66, 11 (Nov. 2020), 4944–4957. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3478
Chengwei Qin, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, Jiaao Chen, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Diyi Yang. 2023. Is ChatGPT a
General-Purpose Natural Language Processing Task Solver? arXiv:2302.06476 [cs.CL]
Lauren Scott, Lynne Coventry, Marta E. Cecchinato, and Mark Warner. 2023. “I figured her feeling a little bit bad
was worth it to not spread that kind of hate”: Exploring how UK families discuss and challenge misinformation.
In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’23). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581202
Kai Shu, Amrita Bhattacharjee, Faisal Alatawi, Tahora H Nazer, Kaize Ding, Mansooreh Karami, and Huan Liu. 2020.
Combating disinformation in a social media age. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery 10, 6 (2020), e1385.
Sander van der Linden, Anthony Leiserowitz, Seth Rosenthal, and Edward Maibach. 2017. Inoculating the Public
against Misinformation about Climate Change. Global challenges (Hoboken, NJ) 1, 2 (Feb. 2017), 1600008.
https://doi.org/10.1002/gch2.201600008
Bertie Vidgen, Harry Taylor, Myrto Pantazi, Zoe Anastasiou, Becky Inkster, and Helen Margetts. 2021. Understanding
vulnerability to online misinformation. The Alan Turing Institute. Retrieved September 27, 2021 (2021), 2021–02.
Jan Philip Wahle, Nischal Ashok, Terry Ruas, Norman Meuschke, Tirthankar Ghosal, and Bela Gipp. 2022. Testing the
generalization of neural language models for COVID-19 misinformation detection. In International Conference on
Information. Springer, 381–392.
Xiang Wei, Xingyu Cui, Ning Cheng, Xiaobin Wang, Xin Zhang, Shen Huang, Pengjun Xie, Jinan Xu, Yufeng Chen,
Meishan Zhang, Yong Jiang, and Wenjuan Han. 2023. Zero-Shot Information Extraction via Chatting with ChatGPT.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.10205 arXiv:2302.10205 [cs].
Kai-Cheng Yang and Filippo Menczer. 2023. Large language models can rate news outlet credibility. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.00228 (2023).
Xianjun Yang, Yan Li, Xinlu Zhang, Haifeng Chen, and Wei Cheng. 2023. Exploring the Limits of ChatGPT for Query
or Aspect-based Text Summarization. (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2302.08081
14

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Junjie Ye, Xuanting Chen, Nuo Xu, Can Zu, Zekai Shao, Shichun Liu, Yuhan Cui, Zeyang Zhou, Chao Gong, Yang
Shen, Jie Zhou, Siming Chen, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, and Xuanjing Huang. 2023. A Comprehensive Capability Analysis
of GPT-3 and GPT-3.5 Series Models. arXiv:2303.10420 [cs.CL]

15

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Supplementary Material
A

Logistic Regression

Individual Regions as Standalone Category: Table 4 and Table 5 are based on logistic regression where the
benchmark is the March GPT-4 model, statements from Asia-Pacific and before model training cutoff time. In this
regression model, the Asia-Pacific region serves as a “boundary” case – other Global North regions (i.e. North America
and Europe) have better model performance, while all Global South regions (i.e. Africa, Latin America, and the Middle
East) have worse model performance.
Table 4: Logit Regression Model Details, Individual Regions as Standalone Category
Dep. Variable:
correct
No. Observations:
15000
Model:
Logit
Df Residuals:
14989
Method:
MLE
Df Model:
10
Pseudo R-squ.:
0.037
Log-Likelihood:
-9472.5
Converged:
True
LL-Null:
-9834.2
Covariance Type: nonrobust LLR p-value:
6.2e-149
Table 5: Logistic Regression Coefficients, Individual Regions as Standalone Category
Intercept
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-3.5-turbo-0301]
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-3.5-turbo-0613]
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613]
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-4-0613]
C(region, Treatment(reference=’ASIA-PACIFIC’))[T.AFRICA]
C(region, Treatment(reference=’ASIA-PACIFIC’))[T.EUROPE]
C(region, Treatment(reference=’ASIA-PACIFIC’))[T.LATIN AMERICA]
C(region, Treatment(reference=’ASIA-PACIFIC’))[T.MIDDLE EAST]
C(region, Treatment(reference=’ASIA-PACIFIC’))[T.NORTH AMERICA]
C(post cutoff)[T.1]

16

coef

std err

z

P> |z|

[0.025

0.975]

1.3884
-0.5428
-0.3564
-0.3654
-0.4321
-0.5559
0.1596
-0.3040
-0.1645
0.1752
-0.6927

0.060
0.056
0.056
0.056
0.056
0.059
0.062
0.060
0.060
0.062
0.035

22.971
-9.715
-6.325
-6.488
-7.699
-9.366
2.587
-5.087
-2.734
2.837
-19.809

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.000
0.006
0.005
0.000

1.270
-0.652
-0.467
-0.476
-0.542
-0.672
0.039
-0.421
-0.282
0.054
-0.761

1.507
-0.433
-0.246
-0.255
-0.322
-0.440
0.280
-0.187
-0.047
0.296
-0.624

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Global North vs. Global South: Table 6 and Table 7 are based on logistic regression where the benchmark is the March
GPT-4 model, statements from Global North and before model training cutoff time. In this regression model, we group
regions into two categories - the Global North (North America, Europe, and Asia-Pacific) and the Global South (Africa,
Latin America, and the Middle East). Similar to the above regression model with region specific coefficients, this
regression analysis also illustrates that the Global South regions have statistically significant worse model performance
compared with the Global North.
Table 6: Logit Regression Model Details, Global South vs Global North
Dep. Variable:
correct
No. Observations:
15000
Model:
Logit
Df Residuals:
14993
Method:
MLE
Df Model:
10
Pseudo R-squ.:
0.034
Log-Likelihood:
-9500.5
Converged:
True
LL-Null:
-9834.2
Covariance Type: nonrobust LLR p-value:
7.0e-141
Table 7: Logistic Regression Coefficients, Global South vs Global North

Intercept
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-3.5-turbo-0301]
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-3.5-turbo-0613]
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-3.5-turbo-16k-0613]
C(model, Treatment(reference=’gpt-4-0314’))[T.gpt-4-0613]
C(global south)[T.1]
C(post cutoff)[T.1]

17

coef

std err

z

P> |z|

[0.025

0.975]

1.4960
-0.5406
-0.3551
-0.3640
-0.4305
-0.4539
-0.6899

0.050
0.056
0.056
0.056
0.056
0.035
0.035

30.197
-9.697
-6.313
-6.475
-7.684
-13.043
-19.773

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

1.399
-0.650
-0.465
-0.474
-0.540
-0.522
-0.758

1.593
-0.431
-0.245
-0.254
-0.321
-0.386
-0.622

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

B

A P REPRINT

Factuality & Stability (All Temperatures)

Figure 3 shows comparative performance similar to Figure 2 but across all temperatures values.

Figure 3: Performance metrics across different models and temperature values. The dataset consists of 300 labelbalanced statements originating prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021.

Figure 4: Comparative performance of GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 models across varying temperature values, evaluated using
accuracy. The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021.

18

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Figure 5 shows comparative performance (Precision, Recall and F1 Score). Uncertain statements (i.e., labeled as
’unclear’) are marked as incorrect. Figure 6 shows comparative performance (Precision, Recall and F1 Score) but
excluding uncertain statements. Evaluating the models in this way shows similar trends but drastically inflates the
metrics.

Figure 5: Comparative performance of GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 models across varying temperature values, evaluated using
precision, recall, and F1 Score metrics. We treat statements with uncertain predictions as incorrect. The dataset consists
of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021. For comparison, we report
performance excluding uncertain statemens in Figure 6 in Appendix B.

Figure 6: Comparative performance of GPT-4 and GPT-3.5 models across varying temperature values, evaluated using
precision, recall, and F1 score metrics. We exclude statements with uncertain predictions and focus on those with
majority decision of “true” or “false”. The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the
training cutoff date of Sep 2021.

19

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

A P REPRINT

Figure 7(a) illustrates decreasing Mode Frequency as temperature value increases. Figure 7(b) elucidates the variability
in prediction behaviors among different GPT models in response to temperature change. To understand if multiple runs
of the model improve the factuality of its verdicts, we evaluate the models using majority vote versus a one-shot first
prediction setting in Figure 8.

(a) Variation in Mode Frequency across models with increasing temperature values. Lower mode frequency signifies reduced consistency in producing the most frequent or "modal"
output.

(b) Switching predictions of models across temperature transitions. Each curve represents a model’s prediction switch
frequency between adjacent temperature values.

Figure 7: Comparative analysis of model behaviors. (a) Mode Frequency Variation. (b) Prediction Switching Counts.
The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021.

Figure 8: Comparative Analysis of F1 score using Majority Vote (out of 5 predictions) and First Prediction approaches
across different temperature settings. The dataset consists of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the
training cutoff date of Sep 2021.
20

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

C

A P REPRINT

Data Beyond Training Span

Figure 9 and Figure 10 show a decrease in stability metrics for the post September 2021 dataset.

Figure 9: Change in Count of “Unclear” Verdict from data within training span to data beyond training span across
models with increasing temperature values.

Figure 10: Change in Mode Frequency from data within training span to data beyond training span across models with
increasing temperature values.

21

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

D

A P REPRINT

Optional Uncertainty vs. Forced Factual Determination

Figure 11 highlights a overall decrease in multiple metrics when comparing the 2-label with the 3-label prompt
instruction model. While the GPT-4 June version specifically shows a general increase of recall (as high as 12.5% for
temperature 0.5), it is offset by a drop in precision of over 35%.

Figure 11: Difference in Accuracy, Precision and Recall of a two label versus a three label model. The dataset consists
of 300 label-balanced statements originating prior to the training cutoff date of Sep 2021.

22

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

E

A P REPRINT

Uncertainty (Unclear Statements)

Table 8 shows a random sample of statements at least one model marked as “unclear”. The topics range from benign
information about a novel and a reading app to false claims of international rocket strikes.
Table 8: Statements with Unclear Verdicts
ID

Statement

265

The capital of Eritrea was hit by rockets fired from Ethiopia’s rebellious northern Tigray
region on November 14, 2020.
The award-winning scholar-writer, Dr. Lola Akande of the Department of English, University of Lagos, has released a novel: Where Are You From? The novel dwells on citizenship,
indigenisation, inter-ethnic marriages, and youthful exuberance.
The Russian government has required polygamy for its male citizens
French football player Paul Pogba has retired from the international game in protest against
French President Emmanuel Macron’s recent comments about radical Islam.
Google has introduced the Arabic version to its free Read Along Android app to help
children over five years old independently learn and build their reading skills.

42
207
222
31

F

Ground Truth
False
True
False
False
True

False Positive Statements

Table 9 is a selected list of statements that are identified as false positives by all models at temperature value zero.
Table 9: Statements Identified as False Positives by All Models at Temperature 0
ID

Statement

266

Following an operation that enabled the commando army to seize one of TPLF’s buildings, many Tigray
People’s Liberation Front (TPLF) mafia members have been caught fleeing with bags and boxes of money.
The novel coronavirus was never detected in the major Chinese cities of Beijing and Shanghai
Zimbabwean businessman and socialite Genius “Ginimbi” Kadungure, who died in a car crash, bought his
own coffin adorned with a green guitar a week before his death.
Russian President Vladimir Putin made comments backing Ethiopia in its dispute with neighbours over the
mega-dam it has built on the Nile river.
Africa’s richest man, Aliko Dangote, gave away money, food and other assistance to 10,000 youths who have
lost loved ones to the Covid-19 pandemic.
The World Health Organization’s (WHO) director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he had tested
positive for Covid-19.
US president-elect Joe Biden and former president Barack Obama tweeted to call for the release of Ugandan
opposition politician Bobi Wine who was detained on November 18, 2020.
Pope Francis kissed the hands of American banker David Rockefeller and a member of the wealthy Rothschild
family in 2021.
Indians celebrated the creation of a new base for Palestinian militant group Hamas in the Indian state of
Kerala.

226
264
254
263
255
261
282
277

23

Global-Liar: Factuality of LLMs over Time and Geographic Regions

G

A P REPRINT

Inconsistencies in Fact-Checking Outcomes via ChatGPT Interface

Figure 12 illustrates an example where the GPT model fails to show consistent result given same queries multiple times.

Figure 12: An illustration of the ChatGPT web interface using the GPT-3.5 model, showing differing outcomes for a
statement when fact-checked through repeated queries. The model was queried on June 6, 2023.

24

