BLEND: A Benchmark for LLMs on Everyday
Knowledge in Diverse Cultures and Languages

arXiv:2406.09948v2 [cs.CL] 16 Jan 2025

Junho Myung1,∗ , Nayeon Lee1,∗ , Yi Zhou2,∗ , Jiho Jin1 , Rifki Afina Putri1 ,
Dimosthenis Antypas2 , Hsuvas Borkakoty2 , Eunsu Kim1 , Carla Perez-Almendros2 ,
Abinew Ali Ayele3,4 , Víctor Gutiérrez-Basulto2 , Yazmín Ibáñez-García2 , Hwaran Lee5 ,
Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad6 , Kiwoong Park1 , Anar Sabuhi Rzayev1 , Nina White2 ,
Seid Muhie Yimam3 , Mohammad Taher Pilehvar2 , Nedjma Ousidhoum2 ,
Jose Camacho-Collados2 , Alice Oh1
1

KAIST, 2 Cardiff University, 3 Universität Hamburg, 4 Bahir Dar University,
5
NAVER AI Lab, 6 Imperial College London

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) often lack culture-specific knowledge of daily life,
especially across diverse regions and non-English languages. Existing benchmarks
for evaluating LLMs’ cultural sensitivities are limited to a single language or collected from online sources such as Wikipedia, which do not reflect the mundane
everyday lifestyles of diverse regions. That is, information about the food people
eat for their birthday celebrations, spices they typically use, musical instruments
youngsters play, or the sports they practice in school is common cultural knowledge
but uncommon in easily collected online sources, especially for underrepresented
cultures. To address this issue, we introduce BLEND, a hand-crafted benchmark
designed to evaluate LLMs’ everyday knowledge across diverse cultures and languages. BLEND comprises 52.6k question-answer pairs from 16 countries/regions,
in 13 different languages, including low-resource ones such as Amharic, Assamese,
Azerbaijani, Hausa, and Sundanese. We construct the benchmark to include two
formats of questions: short-answer and multiple-choice. We show that LLMs
perform better for cultures that are highly represented online, with a maximum
57.34% difference in GPT-4, the best-performing model, in the short-answer format.
For cultures represented by mid-to-high-resource languages, LLMs perform better
in their local languages, but for cultures represented by low-resource languages,
LLMs perform better in English than the local languages. We make our dataset
publicly available at: https://github.com/nlee0212/BLEnD.

1

Introduction

Despite the worldwide usage of large language models (LLMs), capturing cultural everyday knowledge specific to a particular country or region is challenging because such knowledge is often not
explicitly documented in online data sources like Wikipedia, which are commonly used to train LLMs.
For instance, the answers to mundane everyday questions such as “What can typically be found in
the backyard of houses in your country?" are not included in the training data of LLMs, except for a
handful of highly represented regions such as North America. Consequently, LLMs may provide
incorrect, incomplete, or nonsensical responses to everyday questions in underrepresented cultures,
*
*

Equal contribution.
Co-first authors: junho00211@kaist.ac.kr, nlee0212@kaist.ac.kr, zhouy131@cardiff.ac.UK

38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.

Manual Data Construction

BLEND
1. Short-Answer Question (SAQ)

1. Question Collection

Azerbaijan (Azerbaijani)
Q. Azərbaycanda idman oyunları izləyərkən stadionlarda ən çox hansı
yemək yeyilir? A: Cips, …
China (Chinese)
Q. 在中国的体育场馆里观看比赛时，最常吃的食物是什么？ A: 爆米花, …

What do people from Spain usually eat for dessert?
What do people eat on their birthday in Ethiopia?

Who usually do the house chores in Assam?

US (English)
Q. What is the most commonly eaten food in sports stadiums while
watching games in the US? A: Hot Dogs, …

2. Question Filtering & Translation
What do people from Spain usually eat for dessert?

2. Multiple-Choice Question (MCQ)

What do people eat on their birthday in Ethiopia?

Q. What is the most common spice/herb used in dishes from Greece?
A. Black Pepper
B. Cumin
C. Epazote
D. Oregano

Who usually do the house chores in Assam?
Stereotypical

⇒ 500 questions × 16 countries/regions (13 languages)

(Ans. from the US)
(Ans. from China)
(Ans. from Mexico)

3. Answer Annotation

대한민국 사람들은 생일에 무엇을 먹나요?

(What do people eat on their birthday in South Korea?)

미역국

(Seaweed Soup)

케이크
(Cake)

생일 케이크

(Birthday Cake)

LLM Evaluation

갈비

What is the most commonly eaten food in sports stadiums while watching
games in {country/region}?

(Galbi)

4. Answer Aggregation
대한민국 사람들은 생일에 무엇을 먹나요?

(What do people eat on their birthday in South Korea?)

미역국

(Seaweed Soup)

케이크

생일 케이크

(Cake) (Birthday Cake)

갈비

(Galbi)

…

Azerbaijan

China

West Java

UK

Cips

(chips)

爆米花

(popcorn)

Kacang

Pie

Hot Dogs

Küftə

瓜子

Seblak

Pie

Hot Dogs

(meatball)

(sunflower seeds)

(Peanut)
(Seblak)

US

Figure 1: The overall framework of dataset construction and LLM evaluation on BLEND. BLEND is
built through 4 steps: question collection, question filtering & translation, answer annotation, and
answer aggregation. The dataset includes the same questions in 13 different languages, answered from
16 different countries/regions. We evaluate LLMs by short-answer and multiple-choice questions.
even though these inquiries are frequently encountered in daily lives. This can lead to hallucinations
or stereotypical responses, potentially offending a large and diverse user base.
This challenge becomes even more evident in cross-lingual settings, as most LLMs are primarily
trained on English data reflecting Western perspectives [8, 20, 15]. They often reflect the stereotypes
present in the training data [19, 18, 21, 36, 13], hence these models would often respond based on
Western perspectives rather than reflecting actual diverse practices. Ideally, language models would
reflect the cultural norms of various regions around the world and generate culturally appropriate
content when responding in local languages of the regions, unless otherwise specified. To develop
multilingual LLMs with such cultural appropriateness, we first need to evaluate the cultural commonsense knowledge. However, there is no well-crafted multilingual multicultural benchmark that
captures the daily lives of people in diverse cultures.
To bridge this gap, we present BLEND, a Benchmark for LLMs on Everyday knowledge in Diverse
cultures and languages. The benchmark covers 13 languages spoken in 16 different countries and
regions shown in Table 1. Note that we include languages that are spoken in two regions with vastly
different cultures, such as South Korea and North Korea, both represented by the Korean language. To
effectively capture the cultural diversity of people’s daily lives, we recruit annotators who are native
speakers from various countries. The final dataset includes 500 socio-cultural question-answer pairs
for each country/region in 6 categories: food, sports, family, education, holidays/celebrations/leisure,
and work-life. To capture a comprehensive understanding of the cultural sensitivity of LLMs, we
create a set of questions and answers in two formats: short-answer and multiple-choice questions.
The overall framework for construction and evaluation of BLEND is shown in Figure 1. The statistics
of BLEND are shown in Table 1 1 . In total, BLEND features an extensive collection of 52.6k
question-and-answer pairs, 15k short-answer and 37.6k multiple-choice.
Our experimental results on BLEND show that even current state-of-the-art LLMs exhibit unbalanced
cultural knowledge and unfair cultural biases across various countries and regions. The average
performance of all tested models on short answer questions about United States (US) culture in English
is 79.22%. In contrast, when asked about Ethiopian (ET) culture in Amharic, the average performance
1

Throughout the paper, we use the two-letter ISO codes for each country/region and language, as shown in
Table 3.

2

Table 1: Statistics of the question samples within BLEND. BLEND is composed of two question
types: Short Answer Questions (SAQ) and Multiple-Choice Questions (MCQ). The question samples
are generated based on the 500 question templates generated by annotators from all countries/regions.
SAQ

MCQ

Country/Region

Language

Count

United States (US)
United Kingdom (GB)
China (CN)
Spain (ES)
Indonesia (ID)
Mexico (MX)
South Korea (KR)
Greece (GR)
Iran (IR)
Algeria (DZ)
Azerbaijan (AZ)
North Korea (KP)
West Java (JB)
Assam (AS)
Northern Nigeria (NG)
Ethiopia (ET)

English (en)
English (en)
English (en), Chinese (zh)
English (en), Spanish (es)
English (en), Indonesian (id)
English (en), Spanish (es)
English (en), Korean (ko)
English (en), Greek (el)
English (en), Persian (fa)
English (en), Arabic (ar)
English (en), Azerbaijani (az)
English (en), Korean (ko)
English (en), Sundanese (su)
English (en), Assamese (as)
English (en), Hausa (ha)
English (en), Amharic (am)

500
500
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000
1,000

Subtotal

15,000

Total

Language

Count

English (en)

1,942
2,167
1,929
1,931
1,995
1,899
2,512
2,734
3,699
2,600
2,297
2,185
2,345
2,451
2,008
2,863
37,557
52,557

drops to only 12.18%, highlighting a significant performance gap in relatively underrepresented
cultures and languages. A similar trend is observed in the multiple-choice format, where the LLMs
are required to choose the correct answer for each target country/region, with answers from other
countries/regions presented as wrong options.
The main contributions of our paper are as follows:
• We present BLEND, a benchmark of carefully crafted 52.5k question-answer pairs that
reflect the everyday cultural knowledge across 16 countries/regions in 13 different languages.
• Within BLEND, we propose two types of questions to automatically measure the cultural
knowledge in LLMs: short-answer questions and multiple-choice questions.
• We conduct extensive experiments across 16 LLMs on BLEND, showing a significant
performance gap between highly represented cultures and underrepresented cultures.

2

Related Work

Although LLMs generally incorporate extensive parametric knowledge from large text corpora
during pretraining [25], such models frequently display bias due to imbalanced representations in
the data sources [3]. Cultural knowledge is critical in enhancing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs,
contributing significantly to their success across various downstream applications.
Numerous studies have examined the socio-cultural aspects of LLMs. Previous work on cultural NLP
defines culture as the way of life of a specific group of people [10]. Most research on the cultural
knowledge of LLMs centers on the culture at a national level. Anacleto et al. [1] collect commonsense
knowledge about eating habits in Brazil, Mexico, and US through the Open Mind Common Sense
portal. GeoMLAMA [33] introduces 16 geo-diverse commonsense concepts and uses crowdsourcing
to compile knowledge from 5 different countries, each in its native languages. Nguyen et al. [22]
introduce a methodology to extract large-scale cultural commonsense knowledge from the Common
Crawl corpus on geography, religion, and occupations. CREHate [17] is a cross-cultural English hate
speech dataset covering annotations from 5 English-speaking countries. CultureAtlas [9] includes
textual data encapsulating the cultural norms from 193 countries, primarily sourced from Wikipedia
documents in English. However, the majority of these studies are conducted exclusively in English
and focus on more objective aspects of culture that are written in formal data sources.
3

Table 2: Detailed statistics of the number of questions per category for each country/region in Short
Answer Questions (SAQ) and Multiple-Choice Questions (MCQ).

SAQ
MCQ
United States (US)
United Kingdom (GB)
Spain (ES)
Mexico (MX)
Indonesia (ID)
China (CN)
South Korea (KR)
Algeria (DZ)
Greece (GR)
Iran (IR)
North Korea (KP)
Azerbaijan (AZ)
West Java (JB)
Assam (AS)
Northern Nigeria (NG)
Ethiopia (ET)

Food

Sports

Family

Education

Holidays

Work-life

105

88

63

84

92

68

642
990
714
489
471
475
753
873
1,345
666
784
852
892
862
647
984

393
403
476
491
369
349
792
569
516
519
430
513
461
584
421
649

60
50
43
39
60
74
57
59
40
50
78
65
20
34
50
46

173
189
172
183
212
200
218
189
154
173
228
216
160
198
207
278

500
427
425
578
699
705
539
819
500
2,135
476
453
680
666
508
692

174
108
101
119
184
126
153
91
179
156
189
198
132
107
175
214

More recent studies have focused on the cultural knowledge of non-English speaking countries and
languages. For instance, CLIcK [14] and HAE-RAE Bench [29] evaluate LLMs’ knowledge in
Korean, while COPAL-ID [32], ID-CSQA [26], and IndoCulture [15] include culturally nuanced
questions in Indonesian. Nonetheless, we do not know of any work that has been done to compare
the cultural adaptiveness of LLMs across diverse languages and cultures using the same question set,
which would enable a direct comparison.
Other recent work focuses on capturing the everyday cultural nuances of LLMs using social networking platforms. StereoKG [7] extracts cultural stereotypes of five nationalities and five religious
groups from questions posted on X (formerly Twitter) and Reddit. However, this method produces a
significant amount of noisy and inappropriate assertions due to insufficient filtering. CAMEL [20]
includes masked prompts from naturally occurring contexts on X, focusing on Arabic content, and
CultureBank [28] is a collection of diverse perspectives and opinions on cultural descriptors, including
English comments from TikTok and Reddit. However, these datasets are limited to a single language
and rely solely on data available from social media, not able to capture people’s everyday behaviors
to the full extent [31].
In contrast to prior work, BLEND is carefully human-crafted, capturing everyday life cultural
knowledge across 13 languages spoken in 16 different countries/regions including underrepresented
regions such as West Java and North Korea.

3

Construction of BLEND

Language Coverage. We select languages with varying levels of resource availability using the
metrics defined by Joshi et al. [12]. The resource availability of languages included in BLEND is
shown in Table 4 in the Appendix. Additionally, we involve at least one author who is a native speaker
of the language and originally from the country/region represented in the dataset to handle the data
inspection process 2 .
Question Collection and Filtering.
BLEND includes 500 question templates that reflect
daily life aspects across six socio-cultural categories: food, sports, family, education, holidays/celebrations/leisure, and work-life. To create these templates, we collect 10-15 questions
for each category from at least two native annotators per country/region. These annotators are asked
to generate culturally relevant questions about their countries while avoiding stereotypical questions.
The question generation guideline is shown in Appendix B.4. The collected questions are filtered
2

North Korea was an exception, where we collaborated with a South Korean researcher studying North
Korean language.

4

US
GB
ES
CN
ID
MX
KR
DZ
GR
IR
KP
AZ
JB
AS
NG
ET

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
US GB ES CN ID MX KR DZ GR IR KP AZ JB AS NG ET

Figure 2: Heatmap showing the average number of common lemmas within each question between
all country/region pairs. Pairs from the same countries/regions are shown in white. Higher numbers
of shared lemmas indicate that those countries/regions provide more similar answers compared to
other countries/regions (e.g., Indonesia and West Java).
to eliminate duplicates and country-specific items that can only apply to one country/region. For
example, items with proper nouns from a single country/region are excluded. Then the questions
are formatted into templates like “What is a common snack for preschool kids in your country?”
Subsequently, ‘your country’ is replaced by the country/region names for localizing the questions.
Except for US and GB, the questions are translated into the local languages by the native speakers.
This process results in a comprehensive dataset of 15,000 short-answer questions, as shown in Table
1. The specific number of questions per topic is shown in Table 2.
Answer Annotation. To obtain the answers to the collected questions, we recruit annotators who
are native speakers of the target languages and are originally from the target regions/countries. We
ensure that the annotators have lived in these countries for over half of their lifetimes 3 . For most
countries, we recruit annotators through Prolific 4 . However, in cases where it is not possible to find
annotators through crowdsourcing platforms (i.e., DZ, KR, KP, AZ, JB, AS, NG, and ET), we directly
recruit five annotators who meet our criteria 5 .
Annotators are required to give at least one short answer to each question and can offer up to three
responses if a single answer is insufficient. If an annotator does not know the answer, they can choose
from the following options: ‘not applicable to our culture,’ ‘no specific answer for this question,’
‘I don’t know the answer,’ or ‘others.’ By default, responses are collected from five annotators per
question. If an annotator chooses ‘I don’t know the answer’, we discard the response and collect a new
one. This process continues until five valid responses for each question are obtained, or more than
five annotators choose ‘I don’t know’. Examples of the collected questions with answers from each
country are presented in Figure 1. The guideline and the interface for answer annotation provided to
annotators are shown in Appendix B.5 and B.6.
Answer Aggregation. We request 1-2 annotators from each country to review the annotations and
remove invalid answers. These invalid answers appear to be due to some annotators misunderstanding
a question, leading to nonsensical answers. Additionally, due to the nature of natural language, there
are multiple variations of a single term (e.g., “go to bed” and “sleep”). We instruct the annotators to
group these variants into one to ensure the final dataset contains accurate vote counts for each answer.
We also ask the annotators to translate all the annotations into English. As a result, our final dataset
includes variants in local languages and English, along with a final vote count for answers to the
question.
3

This condition was not fully met for North Korea due to a very limited pool of annotators.
https://www.prolific.co/
5
Tables 5 and 6 in the Appendix shows a detailed demographic distribution of the annotators.
4

5

Statistical Analysis on Annotations. We analyze the annotations to assess their quality and
consistency, as detailed in Table 7 in the Appendix. Despite the subjective nature of the questions,
the average level of agreement among annotators, calculated by the average of the maximum votes
for each question, is 3.16 out of 5 (63.2%). The balance within the dataset indicates that while there
is consensus on certain annotations, there is also a substantial variety in the answers within each
country, reflecting a diverse range of perspectives. We also present the average number of annotations
per question in Table 8 in the Appendix, to show the level of answer variance.
Table 9 in the Appendix presents the average number of ’I don’t know’ responses per question. On
average, there were 1.01 out of 5 such responses per question, with a standard deviation of 0.35
(ranging from a high of 1.912 in Northern Nigeria to a low of 0.42 in South Korea). The frequency
of ’I don’t know’ responses was higher in the sports and holidays/celebrations/leisure categories,
likely due to questions on sports or holidays that are not widely recognized or celebrated in certain
countries or regions.
Furthermore, we measure the overlap of answers between countries/regions by calculating the number
of shared lemmas of the English versions of annotations to compare the trend between them and
show the result in Figure 2. The result indicates that countries/regions with closely aligned cultural
backgrounds exhibit higher overlaps in answers. The top pairs with the most similar responses are
Indonesia & West Java (a province in Indonesia), the United States & the United Kingdom, and Spain
& Mexico, likely due to shared historical, linguistic, or cultural ties that influence how questions are
understood and answered. On the other hand, the pairs with the lowest value are Northern Nigeria &
Greece/Ethiopia/South Korea. This could be due to the fact that Northern Nigeria has its own unique
regional culture captured in the dataset.

4

LLMs Cultural Knowledge Evaluation

We measure how the current LLMs perform on BLEND on the two task settings: short answer and
multiple-choice. Details for the experimental settings and the 16 evaluated models can be seen in
Appendix C.1.
4.1

Short Answer Questions (SAQ)

Experimental Setting. In this experiment, we measure LLMs’ performance on SAQ. The final
score for each country is calculated as the average score over two prompts: 1) directly ask LLMs to
provide the answer, and 2) add persona to the LLMs to make them act as a person from the target
country or region. The detailed prompts are shown in Appendix C.2.1. To compute the score, we first
mark the LLM’s response as correct if it is included in the human annotators’ responses to the same
question. Then we compute the percentage of questions to which LLM’s answer is correct. More
details on calculating the scores can be found in Appendix C.2.2.
We compute the scores for all the countries based on the results obtained for the local language and
English, respectively. We use lemmatizers and stemmers to handle highly inflectional languages such
as Arabic and variations in words. The details are shown in Appendix C.2.2. In addition, we remove
accents from words in languages that contain accents, such as Spanish and Greek, to ensure that the
annotations from human annotators match the responses of LLMs. When computing the scores, we
ignore questions for which three or more annotators do not know the answer.
4.1.1

LLM Performance on SAQ

Figure 3a presents the performance of five LLMs on short answer questions in the local languages
of target countries/regions. Table 10 shows the performance of all 16 LLMs evaluated. The results
indicate a consistent trend of lower performance for lower resource languages [12].
Highlighting just a few results, the average LLM performance for US, Spain, Iran, North Korea,
Northern Nigeria, and Ethiopia are 79.22%, 69.08%, 50.78%, 41.92%, 21.18%, and 12.18%, respectively, indicating a significant drop in performance for underrepresented cultures. Countries that
share a common language but differ culturally show significant differences, for example, GPT-4,
the highest-performing model, shows a substantial performance disparity of 31.63% between South
Korea and North Korea. Similarly, between Spain and Mexico, GPT-4 exhibits a performance gap
6

80

Scores

60
40
20
0

US-en GB-en ES-es MX-es ID-id CN-zh KR-ko DZ-ar GR-el IR-fa KP-ko AZ-az JB-su AS-as NG-haET-am
GPT-4
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Qwen1.5-72B
Claude-3-Opus
Command R+
HyperCLOVA-X

Scores

(a)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

ES MX ID CN KR DZ GR IR KP AZ JB AS NG ET
Local
English
(b)

Figure 3: (a) LLMs’ performance on short answer questions for each country/region in the local
language. Models constructed from a Western country are shown in shades of blue, whereas those
built from a non-Western country are shown in shades of red. (b) Average performance of all LLMs
in local language and English on short answer questions. The grey error bars indicate the standard
deviations among all models.
of 4.35%. Our findings highlight the critical need for LLMs to be trained on more diverse datasets,
including low-resource languages and underrepresented cultures.
Performance of Region-Centric LLMs. Models built from non-Western countries tend to show
higher performance on that specific country/region. For example, as seen in Figure 3a, Qwen1.572B [5], made by the Qwen Team in Alibaba 6 Group, shows highest performance on Chinese
among all models. HyperCLOVA-X [34], built from the NAVER 7 HyperCLOVA Team, also shows
comparable results on Korean, even exceeding GPT-4 performance in North Korean cultural questions.
These language/region-specific models often benefit from customized datasets richer in local cultural
content and nuances, typically underrepresented in the more universally used datasets, leading to
higher performances in their regions.
Local language vs. English. We compare the average LLM performance when prompted in
local languages versus English, as shown in Figure 3b 8 . For cultures represented by high-resource
languages like Spanish and Chinese, the local languages show better performance across all models.
In contrast, in cultures represented by low-resource languages such as Azerbaijani, Sundanese, and
Amharic, English results in better performance (full results are shown in Table 11). This implies
that the models’ proficiency in a particular language significantly influences its performance and that
models tend to show better cultural sensitivity in the local language when they possess sufficient
6

Chinese technology company (https://www.alibabagroup.com/)
Korean technology company (https://www.navercorp.com/)
8
Performance on the six models presented in Figure 3a on the English version of SAQ is shown in Figure 13.

7

7

linguistic capability. Note for North Korean (KP) cultural questions, both English and Korean show
poor performance as expected, but Korean performs slightly better, as it is a relatively high-resource
language.
Performance by Question Category. In our analysis of six socio-cultural categories, models
generally exhibit lower performance on questions related to food and holidays/celebrations/leisure
than those concerning work-life or education. This disparity, significant with a p < 0.05 using one-way
ANOVA, is detailed in Figure 15. This pattern indicates that more subjective topics like food and
leisure are more challenging for LLMs to show cultural adaptiveness.
4.2

Multiple-Choice Questions (MCQ)

While SAQ is effective for multilingual evaluation, LLMs often generate responses that deviate
from the annotators’ one- or few-word answers, for example, generating long sentences, especially
in languages that do not follow the instructions well. Hence we make the MCQ to enable simpler
evaluation of LLMs. One limitation of our MCQ is that it is only available in English, as the incorrect
options were chosen from different cultures’ responses to the same questions, and translating all of
those requires additional work. We plan to release a multilingual version of MCQ soon.
4.2.1

MCQ Construction

We make the multiple-choice questions about each target country/region in English, with other
answer options from other countries/regions. For fair comparison across all countries, we remove
questions for which at least one country has an annotation of ‘not applicable to our culture,’ or more
than three annotators don’t know the answer. We also remove questions where all annotations have
one vote each, indicating no typical answer from that country for that question. We determine the
correct answer for each question by selecting the annotation with the highest votes from each country.
We provide four answer options for each question, with no more than one option from any of the
other countries. The detailed process of choosing plausible incorrect answer options can be seen in
Appendix C.3.1. The final multiple-choice question prompt is shown in Appendix C.3.3.
4.2.2

LLM Performance on MCQ

In general, models show higher performance in MCQ than in SAQ as shown in Figure 4. This
improvement is due to using questions with well-defined answers for multiple-choice questions.
However, the pattern of displaying higher performance in high-resource cultures remains consistent.
When considering the tendencies of all countries/regions for each model, the average Pearson
correlation between the average performance in SAQ in the local languages and English across all
countries/regions and the MCQ performance across all countries/regions is notably strong at 0.93.
Furthermore, the Pearson correlation between the average model performance in English SAQ for
all countries and that in MCQ exhibits a considerably high value of 0.98. This indicates a strong
alignment between the two evaluation formats.

5

Human Evaluation

We conduct a human evaluation for short-answer responses from LLMs to understand the source
of errors. We use responses from GPT-4, the best-performing model, for short-answer questions.
We define the following categories: stereotypical, partially correct, refusal, nonsensical, unnatural
language, and different country’s view to analyze 120 wrong answers based on the automated
evaluation. The detailed instructions and the definitions of each category can be found in Appendix
D.3.1. Also, the summary of the human evaluation results can be found in Table 13.
The most stereotypical responses came from answers generated for underrepresented languages/cultures such as Ethiopia, West Java, and Assam, with 48.33% of responses from Ethiopia
being stereotypical. Most stereotypical questions were related to food or festivals, where the LLM
attempted to provide traditional information about the country or the region without fully understanding the context. For instance, for West Java, the LLM frequently answered any food-related questions
with ‘Seblak,’ one of the most famous dishes originating from the region.
Notably, countries with a high percentage of partially correct answers or refusals were all from
underrepresented cultures, such as Azerbaijan, North Korea, Northern Nigeria, and Ethiopia. This
8

Scores

100
80
60
40

GB US CN ES MX DZ GR KR JB IR ID AZ KP NG AS ET
GPT-4
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Qwen1.5-72B
Claude-3-Opus
Command-R+
HyperCLOVA-X

Figure 4: LLMs’ performance on multiple-choice questions. Models constructed from a Western
country are shown in shades of blue, whereas those built from a non-Western country are shown
in shades of red. Similar to the results from short-answer questions, models tend to show lower
performance in underrepresented countries/regions.
indicates that the LLMs tend to provide a long list of multiple answers or even refuse to answer when
there is insufficient information about the topic/question. The same trend was observed for nonsensical
answers, indicating that the capability of LLMs to comprehend questions is limited for low-resource
languages. There were also many hallucinations for low-resource languages, such as providing
‘Ruslan Cfrov’ as the most famous basketball player in Azerbaijan, despite the non-existence of a
famous player with that name.
GPT-4 also tends to provide answers from the perspective of other countries when responding to
queries about Azerbaijan and North Korea. For Azerbaijan, many answers were from the perspectives
of other countries in the Caucasus region, and for North Korea, most responses were from the
perspective of South Korea. This aligns with the annotations for unnatural language, as the same two
countries had the highest ratio of unnatural language. In the case of Azerbaijan, there were instances
where the LLM even responded in Turkish. For North Korea, a surprising 18.33% of the responses
were marked as unnatural because they were phrased in the words used exclusively in South Korea.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we present BLEND, a benchmark to evaluate the cultural knowledge about everyday
life within 16 current LLMs in 16 countries/regions and 13 distinct languages.
Our experimental findings indicate that current LLMs demonstrate a high level of competence in
highly represented cultures such as the United States and the United Kingdom. However, their
performance is significantly lower in the case of less-represented and underrepresented cultures and
languages, especially when prompted in the local language. This outcome is observed in both shortanswer questions and multiple-choice questions. Furthermore, our study reveals the performance gap
between two countries using the same language, highlighting a cultural bias among those regions.
Moreover, the study shows that the performance of LLMs varies depending on the language used in
prompting: LLMs generally perform better in local languages for mid-to-highly represented cultures,
while for underrepresented cultures, they perform better in English.

7

Limitations and Future Work

One limitation of our approach is the relatively small number of annotators, typically five per
question, sometimes from the same locality within one country. This might not fully represent the
countries/regions we include in our dataset. Extending efforts to increase the number of annotators
per country, especially from diverse regional bases within each of the countries/regions, will be
the most immediate future work of this research. Moreover, most language experts involved in the
benchmark creation were academics proficient in English, the reference language for communication
and translation. This may bias part of the construction process as they may not be fully representative
9

of the population of each country. We do not claim that our data fully represents all the speakers of
any language/region, but our dataset remains a good starting point for researchers interested in the
topic.
Additionally, evaluating short-answer questions poses noticeable challenges. Despite the extensive
human effort and using lemmatizers/stemmers, accounting for all word variations is difficult, leading
to correct answers not being evaluated accurately. Our dataset also faces challenges in evaluating
long-form responses from LLMs, as the annotated data is based on short answers. Future work should
focus on accurately evaluating the cultural adaptiveness of LLMs in long-form natural contexts, as
limitations exist within prompt-based evaluations.

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This project was funded by the KAIST-NAVER hypercreative AI center. Alice Oh is funded by
Institute of Information communications Technology Planning Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by
the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2022-000184, Development and Study of AI Technologies to
Inexpensively Conform to Evolving Policy on Ethics). Moreover, this research project has benefitted
from the Microsoft Accelerate Foundation Models Research (AFMR) grant program through which
leading foundation models hosted by Microsoft Azure along with access to Azure credits were
provided to conduct the research. Jose Camacho-Collados, Dimosthenis Antypas, and Yi Zhou are
supported by a UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship.
We also thank the following annotators for their invaluable help in building the dataset: Ángela
Collados Ais, Kiamehr Rezaee, Nurul Ariyani, Sabrina Borrelli, Trapsilo Bumi, Helia Taheri, Chao
Tan, Guanqun Cao, Dimitra Mavridou, Abderrahmane Samir Lazouni, Noufel Bouslama, Lyes Taher
Khalfi, Nitumoni Neog, Bhagyashree Deka, Sikha Swarnakar, Sangeeta Neog, Nitashree Neog,
Hailegnaw Tilaye, Amare Lakew, Wasihun Lakew, Yohannes Bogale, Addis Alemayehu, Yeon Su
Park, Hee Su Park, Jeong Min Young, Hyewon Im, Geunsoo Lee, David Chong, Dea Adhista, Sarah
Oktavianti, Muhammad Syahrul Kurniawan, Taufik Muhamad Yusup, Miguel Ramirez, Thomas
Welsch, annotators from Prolific, and all other annotators who preferred to remain unnamed.

References
[1] Junia Anacleto, Henry Lieberman, Marie Tsutsumi, Vânia Neris, Aparecido Carvalho, Jose
Espinosa, Muriel Godoi, and Silvia Zem-Mascarenhas. Can common sense uncover cultural
differences in computer applications? In Max Bramer, editor, Artificial Intelligence in Theory
and Practice, pages 1–10, Boston, MA, 2006. Springer US. ISBN 978-0-387-34747-9.
[2] Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin Johnson, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos,
Siamak Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark,
Laurent El Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gaurav Mishra, Erica Moreira,
Mark Omernick, Kevin Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao, Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing
Zhang, Gustavo Hernandez Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham, Jan Botha,
James Bradbury, Siddhartha Brahma, Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin
Cherry, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave,
Mostafa Dehghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz, Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg,
Fangxiaoyu Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Garcia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas
Gonzalez, Guy Gur-Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua Howland, Andrea Hu,
Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hurwitz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagielski, Wenhao Jia,
Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun, Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Benjamin
Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang Li, Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao
Liu, Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru, Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra,
Maysam Moussalem, Zachary Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nystrom, Alicia Parrish,
Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek, Alex Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif, Bryan
Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Aurko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee
Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R. So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha
Valter, Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran Vodrahalli, Xuezhi Wang, Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang,
John Wieting, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu,
Qiao Zhang, Steven Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav Petrov, and Yonghui
Wu. Palm 2 technical report, 2023.
10

[3] Kushal Arora, Layla El Asri, Hareesh Bahuleyan, and Jackie Cheung. Why exposure bias
matters: An imitation learning perspective of error accumulation in language generation. In
Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pages 700–710, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.58. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.58.
[4] Viraat Aryabumi, John Dang, Dwarak Talupuru, Saurabh Dash, David Cairuz, Hangyu Lin,
Bharat Venkitesh, Madeline Smith, Kelly Marchisio, Sebastian Ruder, Acyr Locatelli, Julia
Kreutzer, Nick Frosst, Phil Blunsom, Marzieh Fadaee, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. Aya 23:
Open weight releases to further multilingual progress. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15032, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15032.
[5] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin
Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng Liu,
Gao Liu, Chengqiang Lu, Keming Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren,
Chuanqi Tan, Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei Wang, Shengguang Wu,
Benfeng Xu, Jin Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang, Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu,
Hongyi Yuan, Zheng Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xingxuan Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru Zhang,
Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. Qwen technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16609.
[6] Andrew Bimba, Norisma Idris, Norazlina Khamis, and Nurul Noor. Stemming hausa text: using
affix-stripping rules and reference look-up. Language Resources and Evaluation, 50, 07 2015.
doi: 10.1007/s10579-015-9311-x.
[7] Awantee Deshpande, Dana Ruiter, Marius Mosbach, and Dietrich Klakow. StereoKG: Datadriven knowledge graph construction for cultural knowledge and stereotypes. In Kanika
Narang, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Lambert Mathias, Bertie Vidgen, and Zeerak Talat, editors,
Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH), pages 67–78, Seattle,
Washington (Hybrid), July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
2022.woah-1.7. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.woah-1.7.
[8] Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas I Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton
Bakhtin, Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, et al. Towards
measuring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.16388, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.16388.
[9] Yi Fung, Ruining Zhao, Jae Doo, Chenkai Sun, and Heng Ji. Massively multi-cultural knowledge
acquisition & lm benchmarking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09369, 2024. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2402.09369.
[10] Daniel Hershcovich, Stella Frank, Heather Lent, Miryam de Lhoneux, Mostafa Abdou,
Stephanie Brandl, Emanuele Bugliarello, Laura Cabello Piqueras, Ilias Chalkidis, Ruixiang Cui, Constanza Fierro, Katerina Margatina, Phillip Rust, and Anders Søgaard. Challenges and strategies in cross-cultural NLP. In Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline
Villavicencio, editors, Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6997–7013, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.482. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.482.
[11] Kyle P. Johnson, Patrick Burns, John Stewart, and Todd Cook. Cltk: The classical language
toolkit, 2014–2021. URL https://github.com/cltk/cltk.
[12] Pratik Joshi, Sebastin Santy, Amar Budhiraja, Kalika Bali, and Monojit Choudhury. The
state and fate of linguistic diversity and inclusion in the NLP world. In Dan Jurafsky,
Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel Tetreault, editors, Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 6282–6293, Online, July
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.560. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.560.
[13] Masahiro Kaneko, Danushka Bollegala, Naoaki Okazaki, and Timothy Baldwin. Evaluating gender bias in large language models via chain-of-thought prompting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.15585, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.15585.
11

[14] Eunsu Kim, Juyoung Suk, Philhoon Oh, Haneul Yoo, James Thorne, and Alice Oh. CLIcK:
A benchmark dataset of cultural and linguistic intelligence in Korean. In Nicoletta Calzolari,
Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue, editors,
Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), pages 3335–3346, Torino, Italia, May 2024.
ELRA and ICCL. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.296.
[15] Fajri Koto, Rahmad Mahendra, Nurul Aisyah, and Timothy Baldwin. Indoculture: Exploring
geographically-influenced cultural commonsense reasoning across eleven indonesian provinces.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01854, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01854.
[16] Anoop Kunchukuttan. The IndicNLP Library. https://github.com/anoopkunchukuttan/
indic_nlp_library/blob/master/docs/indicnlp.pdf, 2020.
[17] Nayeon Lee, Chani Jung, Junho Myung, Jiho Jin, Jose Camacho-Collados, Juho Kim, and
Alice Oh. Exploring cross-cultural differences in english hate speech annotations: From dataset
construction to analysis, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.16705.
[18] Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli, editors,
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5356–5371, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.416. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.416.
[19] Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel R. Bowman. CrowS-pairs: A
challenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked language models. In Bonnie Webber,
Trevor Cohn, Yulan He, and Yang Liu, editors, Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1953–1967, Online, November
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.154.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.154.
[20] Tarek Naous, Michael J Ryan, and Wei Xu. Having beer after prayer? measuring cultural bias in
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14456, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2305.14456.
[21] Roberto Navigli, Simone Conia, and Björn Ross. Biases in large language models: origins,
inventory, and discussion. ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality, 15(2):1–21, 2023.
[22] Tuan-Phong Nguyen, Simon Razniewski, Aparna Varde, and Gerhard Weikum. Extracting
cultural commonsense knowledge at scale. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023,
WWW ’23, page 1907–1917, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
ISBN 9781450394161. doi: 10.1145/3543507.3583535. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3543507.3583535.
[23] Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Wenxuan Zhang, Xin Li, Mahani Aljunied, Qingyu Tan, Liying Cheng,
Guanzheng Chen, Yue Deng, Sen Yang, Chaoqun Liu, Hang Zhang, and Lidong Bing. Seallms
- large language models for southeast asia. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00738, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00738.
[24] OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat,
Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao,
Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro,
Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman,
Greg Brockman, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis
Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester
Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai, Cory
Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve
Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus,
Niko Felix, Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges,
Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan
12

Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu, Yufei
Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke,
Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu,
Shengli Hu, Xin Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang,
Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan,
Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan
Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner, Jamie Kiros,
Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis,
Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike,
Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz
Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob
McGrew, Scott Mayer McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David
Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie
Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély,
Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo
Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov,
Andrew Peng, Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Henrique Ponde
de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea
Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh,
Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez,
Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt,
David Schnurr, John Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh,
Sarah Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens, Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski
Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil
Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan
Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vijayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright,
Justin Jay Wang, Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila
Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave Willner, Clemens
Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lauren Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu,
Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers,
Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk,
and Barret Zoph. Gpt-4 technical report, 2024.
[25] Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang
Wu, and Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Kentaro Inui, Jing
Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2463–2473, Hong Kong, China, November
2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1250. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/D19-1250.
[26] Rifki Afina Putri, Faiz Ghifari Haznitrama, Dea Adhista, and Alice Oh. Can llm generate
culturally relevant commonsense qa data? case study in indonesian and sundanese, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.17302.
[27] Irwan Setiawan and Hung-Yu Kao. Sustem: An improved rule-based sundanese stemmer. ACM
Trans. Asian Low-Resour. Lang. Inf. Process., apr 2024. ISSN 2375-4699. doi: 10.1145/3656342.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3656342. Just Accepted.
[28] Weiyan Shi, Ryan Li, Yutong Zhang, Caleb Ziems, Raya Horesh, Rogério Abreu de Paula,
Diyi Yang, et al. Culturebank: An online community-driven knowledge base towards culturally
aware language technologies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15238, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2404.15238.
[29] Guijin Son, Hanwool Lee, Suwan Kim, Huiseo Kim, Jae cheol Lee, Je Won Yeom, Jihyu
Jung, Jung woo Kim, and Songseong Kim. HAE-RAE bench: Evaluation of Korean knowledge in language models. In Nicoletta Calzolari, Min-Yen Kan, Veronique Hoste, Alessandro Lenci, Sakriani Sakti, and Nianwen Xue, editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation
13

(LREC-COLING 2024), pages 7993–8007, Torino, Italia, May 2024. ELRA and ICCL. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.704.
[30] Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut,
Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M. Dai, Anja Hauth, Katie Millican, David Silver, Melvin Johnson,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Amelia Glaese, Jilin Chen, Emily Pitler, Timothy
Lillicrap, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Firat, James Molloy, Michael Isard, Paul R. Barham, Tom
Hennigan, Benjamin Lee, Fabio Viola, Malcolm Reynolds, Yuanzhong Xu, Ryan Doherty, Eli
Collins, Clemens Meyer, Eliza Rutherford, Erica Moreira, Kareem Ayoub, Megha Goel, Jack
Krawczyk, Cosmo Du, Ed Chi, Heng-Tze Cheng, Eric Ni, Purvi Shah, Patrick Kane, Betty Chan,
Manaal Faruqui, Aliaksei Severyn, Hanzhao Lin, YaGuang Li, Yong Cheng, Abe Ittycheriah,
Mahdis Mahdieh, Mia Chen, Pei Sun, Dustin Tran, Sumit Bagri, Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
Jeremiah Liu, Andras Orban, Fabian Güra, Hao Zhou, Xinying Song, Aurelien Boffy, Harish
Ganapathy, Steven Zheng, HyunJeong Choe, Ágoston Weisz, Tao Zhu, Yifeng Lu, Siddharth
Gopal, Jarrod Kahn, Maciej Kula, Jeff Pitman, Rushin Shah, Emanuel Taropa, Majd Al Merey,
Martin Baeuml, Zhifeng Chen, Laurent El Shafey, Yujing Zhang, Olcan Sercinoglu, George
Tucker, Enrique Piqueras, Maxim Krikun, Iain Barr, Nikolay Savinov, Ivo Danihelka, Becca
Roelofs, Anaïs White, Anders Andreassen, Tamara von Glehn, Lakshman Yagati, Mehran
Kazemi, Lucas Gonzalez, Misha Khalman, Jakub Sygnowski, Alexandre Frechette, Charlotte
Smith, Laura Culp, Lev Proleev, Yi Luan, Xi Chen, James Lottes, Nathan Schucher, Federico
Lebron, Alban Rrustemi, Natalie Clay, Phil Crone, Tomas Kocisky, Jeffrey Zhao, Bartek
Perz, Dian Yu, Heidi Howard, Adam Bloniarz, Jack W. Rae, Han Lu, Laurent Sifre, Marcello
Maggioni, Fred Alcober, Dan Garrette, Megan Barnes, Shantanu Thakoor, Jacob Austin, Gabriel
Barth-Maron, William Wong, Rishabh Joshi, Rahma Chaabouni, Deeni Fatiha, Arun Ahuja,
Gaurav Singh Tomar, Evan Senter, Martin Chadwick, Ilya Kornakov, Nithya Attaluri, Iñaki
Iturrate, Ruibo Liu, Yunxuan Li, Sarah Cogan, Jeremy Chen, Chao Jia, Chenjie Gu, Qiao
Zhang, Jordan Grimstad, Ale Jakse Hartman, Xavier Garcia, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana
Pillai, Jacob Devlin, Michael Laskin, Diego de Las Casas, Dasha Valter, Connie Tao, Lorenzo
Blanco, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, David Reitter, Mianna Chen, Jenny Brennan, Clara
Rivera, Sergey Brin, Shariq Iqbal, Gabriela Surita, Jane Labanowski, Abhi Rao, Stephanie
Winkler, Emilio Parisotto, Yiming Gu, Kate Olszewska, Ravi Addanki, Antoine Miech, Annie
Louis, Denis Teplyashin, Geoff Brown, Elliot Catt, Jan Balaguer, Jackie Xiang, Pidong Wang,
Zoe Ashwood, Anton Briukhov, Albert Webson, Sanjay Ganapathy, Smit Sanghavi, Ajay
Kannan, Ming-Wei Chang, Axel Stjerngren, Josip Djolonga, Yuting Sun, Ankur Bapna, Matthew
Aitchison, Pedram Pejman, Henryk Michalewski, Tianhe Yu, Cindy Wang, Juliette Love,
Junwhan Ahn, Dawn Bloxwich, Kehang Han, Peter Humphreys, Thibault Sellam, James
Bradbury, Varun Godbole, Sina Samangooei, Bogdan Damoc, Alex Kaskasoli, Sébastien
M. R. Arnold, Vijay Vasudevan, Shubham Agrawal, Jason Riesa, Dmitry Lepikhin, Richard
Tanburn, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Hyeontaek Lim, Sarah Hodkinson, Pranav Shyam, Johan Ferret,
Steven Hand, Ankush Garg, Tom Le Paine, Jian Li, Yujia Li, Minh Giang, Alexander Neitz,
Zaheer Abbas, Sarah York, Machel Reid, Elizabeth Cole, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Dipanjan
Das, Dominika Rogozińska, Vitaliy Nikolaev, Pablo Sprechmann, Zachary Nado, Lukas Zilka,
Flavien Prost, Luheng He, Marianne Monteiro, Gaurav Mishra, Chris Welty, Josh Newlan,
Dawei Jia, Miltiadis Allamanis, Clara Huiyi Hu, Raoul de Liedekerke, Justin Gilmer, Carl
Saroufim, Shruti Rijhwani, Shaobo Hou, Disha Shrivastava, Anirudh Baddepudi, Alex Goldin,
Adnan Ozturel, Albin Cassirer, Yunhan Xu, Daniel Sohn, Devendra Sachan, Reinald Kim
Amplayo, Craig Swanson, Dessie Petrova, Shashi Narayan, Arthur Guez, Siddhartha Brahma,
Jessica Landon, Miteyan Patel, Ruizhe Zhao, Kevin Villela, Luyu Wang, Wenhao Jia, Matthew
Rahtz, Mai Giménez, Legg Yeung, James Keeling, Petko Georgiev, Diana Mincu, Boxi Wu,
Salem Haykal, Rachel Saputro, Kiran Vodrahalli, James Qin, Zeynep Cankara, Abhanshu
Sharma, Nick Fernando, Will Hawkins, Behnam Neyshabur, Solomon Kim, Adrian Hutter,
Priyanka Agrawal, Alex Castro-Ros, George van den Driessche, Tao Wang, Fan Yang, Shuo
yiin Chang, Paul Komarek, Ross McIlroy, Mario Lučić, Guodong Zhang, Wael Farhan, Michael
Sharman, Paul Natsev, Paul Michel, Yamini Bansal, Siyuan Qiao, Kris Cao, Siamak Shakeri,
Christina Butterfield, Justin Chung, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Shivani Agrawal, Arthur Mensch,
Kedar Soparkar, Karel Lenc, Timothy Chung, Aedan Pope, Loren Maggiore, Jackie Kay,
Priya Jhakra, Shibo Wang, Joshua Maynez, Mary Phuong, Taylor Tobin, Andrea Tacchetti,
Maja Trebacz, Kevin Robinson, Yash Katariya, Sebastian Riedel, Paige Bailey, Kefan Xiao,
Nimesh Ghelani, Lora Aroyo, Ambrose Slone, Neil Houlsby, Xuehan Xiong, Zhen Yang, Elena
Gribovskaya, Jonas Adler, Mateo Wirth, Lisa Lee, Music Li, Thais Kagohara, Jay Pavagadhi,
14

Sophie Bridgers, Anna Bortsova, Sanjay Ghemawat, Zafarali Ahmed, Tianqi Liu, Richard
Powell, Vijay Bolina, Mariko Iinuma, Polina Zablotskaia, James Besley, Da-Woon Chung,
Timothy Dozat, Ramona Comanescu, Xiance Si, Jeremy Greer, Guolong Su, Martin Polacek,
Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Simon Tokumine, Hexiang Hu, Elena Buchatskaya, Yingjie Miao,
Mohamed Elhawaty, Aditya Siddhant, Nenad Tomasev, Jinwei Xing, Christina Greer, Helen
Miller, Shereen Ashraf, Aurko Roy, Zizhao Zhang, Ada Ma, Angelos Filos, Milos Besta,
Rory Blevins, Ted Klimenko, Chih-Kuan Yeh, Soravit Changpinyo, Jiaqi Mu, Oscar Chang,
Mantas Pajarskas, Carrie Muir, Vered Cohen, Charline Le Lan, Krishna Haridasan, Amit
Marathe, Steven Hansen, Sholto Douglas, Rajkumar Samuel, Mingqiu Wang, Sophia Austin,
Chang Lan, Jiepu Jiang, Justin Chiu, Jaime Alonso Lorenzo, Lars Lowe Sjösund, Sébastien
Cevey, Zach Gleicher, Thi Avrahami, Anudhyan Boral, Hansa Srinivasan, Vittorio Selo, Rhys
May, Konstantinos Aisopos, Léonard Hussenot, Livio Baldini Soares, Kate Baumli, Michael B.
Chang, Adrià Recasens, Ben Caine, Alexander Pritzel, Filip Pavetic, Fabio Pardo, Anita Gergely,
Justin Frye, Vinay Ramasesh, Dan Horgan, Kartikeya Badola, Nora Kassner, Subhrajit Roy,
Ethan Dyer, Víctor Campos Campos, Alex Tomala, Yunhao Tang, Dalia El Badawy, Elspeth
White, Basil Mustafa, Oran Lang, Abhishek Jindal, Sharad Vikram, Zhitao Gong, Sergi Caelles,
Ross Hemsley, Gregory Thornton, Fangxiaoyu Feng, Wojciech Stokowiec, Ce Zheng, Phoebe
Thacker, Çağlar Ünlü, Zhishuai Zhang, Mohammad Saleh, James Svensson, Max Bileschi,
Piyush Patil, Ankesh Anand, Roman Ring, Katerina Tsihlas, Arpi Vezer, Marco Selvi, Toby
Shevlane, Mikel Rodriguez, Tom Kwiatkowski, Samira Daruki, Keran Rong, Allan Dafoe,
Nicholas FitzGerald, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Mina Khan, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Marie Pellat,
Vladimir Feinberg, James Cobon-Kerr, Tara Sainath, Maribeth Rauh, Sayed Hadi Hashemi,
Richard Ives, Yana Hasson, Eric Noland, Yuan Cao, Nathan Byrd, Le Hou, Qingze Wang,
Thibault Sottiaux, Michela Paganini, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Alexandre Moufarek, Samer
Hassan, Kaushik Shivakumar, Joost van Amersfoort, Amol Mandhane, Pratik Joshi, Anirudh
Goyal, Matthew Tung, Andrew Brock, Hannah Sheahan, Vedant Misra, Cheng Li, Nemanja
Rakićević, Mostafa Dehghani, Fangyu Liu, Sid Mittal, Junhyuk Oh, Seb Noury, Eren Sezener,
Fantine Huot, Matthew Lamm, Nicola De Cao, Charlie Chen, Sidharth Mudgal, Romina
Stella, Kevin Brooks, Gautam Vasudevan, Chenxi Liu, Mainak Chain, Nivedita Melinkeri,
Aaron Cohen, Venus Wang, Kristie Seymore, Sergey Zubkov, Rahul Goel, Summer Yue, Sai
Krishnakumaran, Brian Albert, Nate Hurley, Motoki Sano, Anhad Mohananey, Jonah Joughin,
Egor Filonov, Tomasz K˛epa, Yomna Eldawy, Jiawern Lim, Rahul Rishi, Shirin Badiezadegan,
Taylor Bos, Jerry Chang, Sanil Jain, Sri Gayatri Sundara Padmanabhan, Subha Puttagunta,
Kalpesh Krishna, Leslie Baker, Norbert Kalb, Vamsi Bedapudi, Adam Kurzrok, Shuntong Lei,
Anthony Yu, Oren Litvin, Xiang Zhou, Zhichun Wu, Sam Sobell, Andrea Siciliano, Alan Papir,
Robby Neale, Jonas Bragagnolo, Tej Toor, Tina Chen, Valentin Anklin, Feiran Wang, Richie
Feng, Milad Gholami, Kevin Ling, Lijuan Liu, Jules Walter, Hamid Moghaddam, Arun Kishore,
Jakub Adamek, Tyler Mercado, Jonathan Mallinson, Siddhinita Wandekar, Stephen Cagle, Eran
Ofek, Guillermo Garrido, Clemens Lombriser, Maksim Mukha, Botu Sun, Hafeezul Rahman
Mohammad, Josip Matak, Yadi Qian, Vikas Peswani, Pawel Janus, Quan Yuan, Leif Schelin,
Oana David, Ankur Garg, Yifan He, Oleksii Duzhyi, Anton Älgmyr, Timothée Lottaz, Qi Li,
Vikas Yadav, Luyao Xu, Alex Chinien, Rakesh Shivanna, Aleksandr Chuklin, Josie Li, Carrie
Spadine, Travis Wolfe, Kareem Mohamed, Subhabrata Das, Zihang Dai, Kyle He, Daniel von
Dincklage, Shyam Upadhyay, Akanksha Maurya, Luyan Chi, Sebastian Krause, Khalid Salama,
Pam G Rabinovitch, Pavan Kumar Reddy M, Aarush Selvan, Mikhail Dektiarev, Golnaz Ghiasi,
Erdem Guven, Himanshu Gupta, Boyi Liu, Deepak Sharma, Idan Heimlich Shtacher, Shachi
Paul, Oscar Akerlund, François-Xavier Aubet, Terry Huang, Chen Zhu, Eric Zhu, Elico Teixeira,
Matthew Fritze, Francesco Bertolini, Liana-Eleonora Marinescu, Martin Bölle, Dominik Paulus,
Khyatti Gupta, Tejasi Latkar, Max Chang, Jason Sanders, Roopa Wilson, Xuewei Wu, Yi-Xuan
Tan, Lam Nguyen Thiet, Tulsee Doshi, Sid Lall, Swaroop Mishra, Wanming Chen, Thang Luong,
Seth Benjamin, Jasmine Lee, Ewa Andrejczuk, Dominik Rabiej, Vipul Ranjan, Krzysztof Styrc,
Pengcheng Yin, Jon Simon, Malcolm Rose Harriott, Mudit Bansal, Alexei Robsky, Geoff Bacon,
David Greene, Daniil Mirylenka, Chen Zhou, Obaid Sarvana, Abhimanyu Goyal, Samuel
Andermatt, Patrick Siegler, Ben Horn, Assaf Israel, Francesco Pongetti, Chih-Wei "Louis" Chen,
Marco Selvatici, Pedro Silva, Kathie Wang, Jackson Tolins, Kelvin Guu, Roey Yogev, Xiaochen
Cai, Alessandro Agostini, Maulik Shah, Hung Nguyen, Noah Ó Donnaile, Sébastien Pereira,
Linda Friso, Adam Stambler, Adam Kurzrok, Chenkai Kuang, Yan Romanikhin, Mark Geller,
ZJ Yan, Kane Jang, Cheng-Chun Lee, Wojciech Fica, Eric Malmi, Qijun Tan, Dan Banica,
Daniel Balle, Ryan Pham, Yanping Huang, Diana Avram, Hongzhi Shi, Jasjot Singh, Chris

15

Hidey, Niharika Ahuja, Pranab Saxena, Dan Dooley, Srividya Pranavi Potharaju, Eileen O’Neill,
Anand Gokulchandran, Ryan Foley, Kai Zhao, Mike Dusenberry, Yuan Liu, Pulkit Mehta, Ragha
Kotikalapudi, Chalence Safranek-Shrader, Andrew Goodman, Joshua Kessinger, Eran Globen,
Prateek Kolhar, Chris Gorgolewski, Ali Ibrahim, Yang Song, Ali Eichenbaum, Thomas Brovelli,
Sahitya Potluri, Preethi Lahoti, Cip Baetu, Ali Ghorbani, Charles Chen, Andy Crawford, Shalini
Pal, Mukund Sridhar, Petru Gurita, Asier Mujika, Igor Petrovski, Pierre-Louis Cedoz, Chenmei
Li, Shiyuan Chen, Niccolò Dal Santo, Siddharth Goyal, Jitesh Punjabi, Karthik Kappaganthu,
Chester Kwak, Pallavi LV, Sarmishta Velury, Himadri Choudhury, Jamie Hall, Premal Shah,
Ricardo Figueira, Matt Thomas, Minjie Lu, Ting Zhou, Chintu Kumar, Thomas Jurdi, Sharat
Chikkerur, Yenai Ma, Adams Yu, Soo Kwak, Victor Ähdel, Sujeevan Rajayogam, Travis
Choma, Fei Liu, Aditya Barua, Colin Ji, Ji Ho Park, Vincent Hellendoorn, Alex Bailey, Taylan
Bilal, Huanjie Zhou, Mehrdad Khatir, Charles Sutton, Wojciech Rzadkowski, Fiona Macintosh,
Konstantin Shagin, Paul Medina, Chen Liang, Jinjing Zhou, Pararth Shah, Yingying Bi, Attila
Dankovics, Shipra Banga, Sabine Lehmann, Marissa Bredesen, Zifan Lin, John Eric Hoffmann,
Jonathan Lai, Raynald Chung, Kai Yang, Nihal Balani, Arthur Bražinskas, Andrei Sozanschi,
Matthew Hayes, Héctor Fernández Alcalde, Peter Makarov, Will Chen, Antonio Stella, Liselotte
Snijders, Michael Mandl, Ante Kärrman, Paweł Nowak, Xinyi Wu, Alex Dyck, Krishnan
Vaidyanathan, Raghavender R, Jessica Mallet, Mitch Rudominer, Eric Johnston, Sushil Mittal,
Akhil Udathu, Janara Christensen, Vishal Verma, Zach Irving, Andreas Santucci, Gamaleldin
Elsayed, Elnaz Davoodi, Marin Georgiev, Ian Tenney, Nan Hua, Geoffrey Cideron, Edouard
Leurent, Mahmoud Alnahlawi, Ionut Georgescu, Nan Wei, Ivy Zheng, Dylan Scandinaro,
Heinrich Jiang, Jasper Snoek, Mukund Sundararajan, Xuezhi Wang, Zack Ontiveros, Itay Karo,
Jeremy Cole, Vinu Rajashekhar, Lara Tumeh, Eyal Ben-David, Rishub Jain, Jonathan Uesato,
Romina Datta, Oskar Bunyan, Shimu Wu, John Zhang, Piotr Stanczyk, Ye Zhang, David
Steiner, Subhajit Naskar, Michael Azzam, Matthew Johnson, Adam Paszke, Chung-Cheng Chiu,
Jaume Sanchez Elias, Afroz Mohiuddin, Faizan Muhammad, Jin Miao, Andrew Lee, Nino
Vieillard, Jane Park, Jiageng Zhang, Jeff Stanway, Drew Garmon, Abhijit Karmarkar, Zhe Dong,
Jong Lee, Aviral Kumar, Luowei Zhou, Jonathan Evens, William Isaac, Geoffrey Irving, Edward
Loper, Michael Fink, Isha Arkatkar, Nanxin Chen, Izhak Shafran, Ivan Petrychenko, Zhe
Chen, Johnson Jia, Anselm Levskaya, Zhenkai Zhu, Peter Grabowski, Yu Mao, Alberto Magni,
Kaisheng Yao, Javier Snaider, Norman Casagrande, Evan Palmer, Paul Suganthan, Alfonso
Castaño, Irene Giannoumis, Wooyeol Kim, Mikołaj Rybiński, Ashwin Sreevatsa, Jennifer
Prendki, David Soergel, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Willi Gierke, Mohsen Jafari, Meenu Gaba,
Jeremy Wiesner, Diana Gage Wright, Yawen Wei, Harsha Vashisht, Yana Kulizhskaya, Jay
Hoover, Maigo Le, Lu Li, Chimezie Iwuanyanwu, Lu Liu, Kevin Ramirez, Andrey Khorlin,
Albert Cui, Tian LIN, Marcus Wu, Ricardo Aguilar, Keith Pallo, Abhishek Chakladar, Ginger
Perng, Elena Allica Abellan, Mingyang Zhang, Ishita Dasgupta, Nate Kushman, Ivo Penchev,
Alena Repina, Xihui Wu, Tom van der Weide, Priya Ponnapalli, Caroline Kaplan, Jiri Simsa,
Shuangfeng Li, Olivier Dousse, Fan Yang, Jeff Piper, Nathan Ie, Rama Pasumarthi, Nathan Lintz,
Anitha Vijayakumar, Daniel Andor, Pedro Valenzuela, Minnie Lui, Cosmin Paduraru, Daiyi
Peng, Katherine Lee, Shuyuan Zhang, Somer Greene, Duc Dung Nguyen, Paula Kurylowicz,
Cassidy Hardin, Lucas Dixon, Lili Janzer, Kiam Choo, Ziqiang Feng, Biao Zhang, Achintya
Singhal, Dayou Du, Dan McKinnon, Natasha Antropova, Tolga Bolukbasi, Orgad Keller, David
Reid, Daniel Finchelstein, Maria Abi Raad, Remi Crocker, Peter Hawkins, Robert Dadashi,
Colin Gaffney, Ken Franko, Anna Bulanova, Rémi Leblond, Shirley Chung, Harry Askham,
Luis C. Cobo, Kelvin Xu, Felix Fischer, Jun Xu, Christina Sorokin, Chris Alberti, Chu-Cheng
Lin, Colin Evans, Alek Dimitriev, Hannah Forbes, Dylan Banarse, Zora Tung, Mark Omernick,
Colton Bishop, Rachel Sterneck, Rohan Jain, Jiawei Xia, Ehsan Amid, Francesco Piccinno,
Xingyu Wang, Praseem Banzal, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Alex Polozov, Victoria Krakovna, Sasha
Brown, MohammadHossein Bateni, Dennis Duan, Vlad Firoiu, Meghana Thotakuri, Tom Natan,
Matthieu Geist, Ser tan Girgin, Hui Li, Jiayu Ye, Ofir Roval, Reiko Tojo, Michael Kwong,
James Lee-Thorp, Christopher Yew, Danila Sinopalnikov, Sabela Ramos, John Mellor, Abhishek
Sharma, Kathy Wu, David Miller, Nicolas Sonnerat, Denis Vnukov, Rory Greig, Jennifer Beattie,
Emily Caveness, Libin Bai, Julian Eisenschlos, Alex Korchemniy, Tomy Tsai, Mimi Jasarevic,
Weize Kong, Phuong Dao, Zeyu Zheng, Frederick Liu, Fan Yang, Rui Zhu, Tian Huey Teh,
Jason Sanmiya, Evgeny Gladchenko, Nejc Trdin, Daniel Toyama, Evan Rosen, Sasan Tavakkol,
Linting Xue, Chen Elkind, Oliver Woodman, John Carpenter, George Papamakarios, Rupert
Kemp, Sushant Kafle, Tanya Grunina, Rishika Sinha, Alice Talbert, Diane Wu, Denese OwusuAfriyie, Cosmo Du, Chloe Thornton, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Pradyumna Narayana, Jing Li, Saaber
Fatehi, John Wieting, Omar Ajmeri, Benigno Uria, Yeongil Ko, Laura Knight, Amélie Héliou,
16

Ning Niu, Shane Gu, Chenxi Pang, Yeqing Li, Nir Levine, Ariel Stolovich, Rebeca SantamariaFernandez, Sonam Goenka, Wenny Yustalim, Robin Strudel, Ali Elqursh, Charlie Deck, Hyo
Lee, Zonglin Li, Kyle Levin, Raphael Hoffmann, Dan Holtmann-Rice, Olivier Bachem, Sho
Arora, Christy Koh, Soheil Hassas Yeganeh, Siim Põder, Mukarram Tariq, Yanhua Sun, Lucian
Ionita, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Pouya Tafti, Zhiyu Liu, Anmol Gulati, Jasmine Liu, Xinyu Ye,
Bart Chrzaszcz, Lily Wang, Nikhil Sethi, Tianrun Li, Ben Brown, Shreya Singh, Wei Fan, Aaron
Parisi, Joe Stanton, Vinod Koverkathu, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Yunjie Li, TJ Lu, Abe
Ittycheriah, Prakash Shroff, Mani Varadarajan, Sanaz Bahargam, Rob Willoughby, David Gaddy,
Guillaume Desjardins, Marco Cornero, Brona Robenek, Bhavishya Mittal, Ben Albrecht, Ashish
Shenoy, Fedor Moiseev, Henrik Jacobsson, Alireza Ghaffarkhah, Morgane Rivière, Alanna
Walton, Clément Crepy, Alicia Parrish, Zongwei Zhou, Clement Farabet, Carey Radebaugh,
Praveen Srinivasan, Claudia van der Salm, Andreas Fidjeland, Salvatore Scellato, Eri LatorreChimoto, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, David Bridson, Dario de Cesare, Tom Hudson, Piermaria
Mendolicchio, Lexi Walker, Alex Morris, Matthew Mauger, Alexey Guseynov, Alison Reid,
Seth Odoom, Lucia Loher, Victor Cotruta, Madhavi Yenugula, Dominik Grewe, Anastasia
Petrushkina, Tom Duerig, Antonio Sanchez, Steve Yadlowsky, Amy Shen, Amir Globerson,
Lynette Webb, Sahil Dua, Dong Li, Surya Bhupatiraju, Dan Hurt, Haroon Qureshi, Ananth
Agarwal, Tomer Shani, Matan Eyal, Anuj Khare, Shreyas Rammohan Belle, Lei Wang, Chetan
Tekur, Mihir Sanjay Kale, Jinliang Wei, Ruoxin Sang, Brennan Saeta, Tyler Liechty, Yi Sun, Yao
Zhao, Stephan Lee, Pandu Nayak, Doug Fritz, Manish Reddy Vuyyuru, John Aslanides, Nidhi
Vyas, Martin Wicke, Xiao Ma, Evgenii Eltyshev, Nina Martin, Hardie Cate, James Manyika,
Keyvan Amiri, Yelin Kim, Xi Xiong, Kai Kang, Florian Luisier, Nilesh Tripuraneni, David
Madras, Mandy Guo, Austin Waters, Oliver Wang, Joshua Ainslie, Jason Baldridge, Han Zhang,
Garima Pruthi, Jakob Bauer, Feng Yang, Riham Mansour, Jason Gelman, Yang Xu, George
Polovets, Ji Liu, Honglong Cai, Warren Chen, XiangHai Sheng, Emily Xue, Sherjil Ozair,
Christof Angermueller, Xiaowei Li, Anoop Sinha, Weiren Wang, Julia Wiesinger, Emmanouil
Koukoumidis, Yuan Tian, Anand Iyer, Madhu Gurumurthy, Mark Goldenson, Parashar Shah,
MK Blake, Hongkun Yu, Anthony Urbanowicz, Jennimaria Palomaki, Chrisantha Fernando,
Ken Durden, Harsh Mehta, Nikola Momchev, Elahe Rahimtoroghi, Maria Georgaki, Amit Raul,
Sebastian Ruder, Morgan Redshaw, Jinhyuk Lee, Denny Zhou, Komal Jalan, Dinghua Li, Blake
Hechtman, Parker Schuh, Milad Nasr, Kieran Milan, Vladimir Mikulik, Juliana Franco, Tim
Green, Nam Nguyen, Joe Kelley, Aroma Mahendru, Andrea Hu, Joshua Howland, Ben Vargas,
Jeffrey Hui, Kshitij Bansal, Vikram Rao, Rakesh Ghiya, Emma Wang, Ke Ye, Jean Michel Sarr,
Melanie Moranski Preston, Madeleine Elish, Steve Li, Aakash Kaku, Jigar Gupta, Ice Pasupat,
Da-Cheng Juan, Milan Someswar, Tejvi M., Xinyun Chen, Aida Amini, Alex Fabrikant, Eric
Chu, Xuanyi Dong, Amruta Muthal, Senaka Buthpitiya, Sarthak Jauhari, Nan Hua, Urvashi
Khandelwal, Ayal Hitron, Jie Ren, Larissa Rinaldi, Shahar Drath, Avigail Dabush, Nan-Jiang
Jiang, Harshal Godhia, Uli Sachs, Anthony Chen, Yicheng Fan, Hagai Taitelbaum, Hila Noga,
Zhuyun Dai, James Wang, Chen Liang, Jenny Hamer, Chun-Sung Ferng, Chenel Elkind, Aviel
Atias, Paulina Lee, Vít Listík, Mathias Carlen, Jan van de Kerkhof, Marcin Pikus, Krunoslav
Zaher, Paul Müller, Sasha Zykova, Richard Stefanec, Vitaly Gatsko, Christoph Hirnschall,
Ashwin Sethi, Xingyu Federico Xu, Chetan Ahuja, Beth Tsai, Anca Stefanoiu, Bo Feng, Keshav
Dhandhania, Manish Katyal, Akshay Gupta, Atharva Parulekar, Divya Pitta, Jing Zhao, Vivaan
Bhatia, Yashodha Bhavnani, Omar Alhadlaq, Xiaolin Li, Peter Danenberg, Dennis Tu, Alex
Pine, Vera Filippova, Abhipso Ghosh, Ben Limonchik, Bhargava Urala, Chaitanya Krishna
Lanka, Derik Clive, Yi Sun, Edward Li, Hao Wu, Kevin Hongtongsak, Ianna Li, Kalind Thakkar,
Kuanysh Omarov, Kushal Majmundar, Michael Alverson, Michael Kucharski, Mohak Patel,
Mudit Jain, Maksim Zabelin, Paolo Pelagatti, Rohan Kohli, Saurabh Kumar, Joseph Kim,
Swetha Sankar, Vineet Shah, Lakshmi Ramachandruni, Xiangkai Zeng, Ben Bariach, Laura
Weidinger, Tu Vu, Amar Subramanya, Sissie Hsiao, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
Adam Sadovsky, Quoc Le, Trevor Strohman, Yonghui Wu, Slav Petrov, Jeffrey Dean, and Oriol
Vinyals. Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models, 2024.
[31] Zeynep Tufekci. Big questions for social media big data: Representativeness, validity and other
methodological pitfalls. In Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social
media, volume 8, pages 505–514, 2014.
[32] Haryo Akbarianto Wibowo, Erland Hilman Fuadi, Made Nindyatama Nityasya, Radityo Eko
Prasojo, and Alham Fikri Aji. Copal-id: Indonesian language reasoning with local culture and
nuances, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.01012.
17

[33] Da Yin, Hritik Bansal, Masoud Monajatipoor, Liunian Harold Li, and Kai-Wei Chang. GeoMLAMA: Geo-diverse commonsense probing on multilingual pre-trained language models. In
Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang, editors, Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2039–2055, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
2022.emnlp-main.132. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.132.
[34] Kang Min Yoo, Jaegeun Han, Sookyo In, Heewon Jeon, Jisu Jeong, Jaewook Kang, Hyunwook
Kim, Kyung-Min Kim, Munhyong Kim, Sungju Kim, Donghyun Kwak, Hanock Kwak, Se Jung
Kwon, Bado Lee, Dongsoo Lee, Gichang Lee, Jooho Lee, Baeseong Park, Seongjin Shin, Joonsang Yu, Seolki Baek, Sumin Byeon, Eungsup Cho, Dooseok Choe, Jeesung Han, Youngkyun
Jin, Hyein Jun, Jaeseung Jung, Chanwoong Kim, Jinhong Kim, Jinuk Kim, Dokyeong Lee,
Dongwook Park, Jeong Min Sohn, Sujung Han, Jiae Heo, Sungju Hong, Mina Jeon, Hyunhoon
Jung, Jungeun Jung, Wangkyo Jung, Chungjoon Kim, Hyeri Kim, Jonghyun Kim, Min Young
Kim, Soeun Lee, Joonhee Park, Jieun Shin, Sojin Yang, Jungsoon Yoon, Hwaran Lee, Sanghwan
Bae, Jeehwan Cha, Karl Gylleus, Donghoon Ham, Mihak Hong, Youngki Hong, Yunki Hong,
Dahyun Jang, Hyojun Jeon, Yujin Jeon, Yeji Jeong, Myunggeun Ji, Yeguk Jin, Chansong Jo,
Shinyoung Joo, Seunghwan Jung, Adrian Jungmyung Kim, Byoung Hoon Kim, Hyomin Kim,
Jungwhan Kim, Minkyoung Kim, Minseung Kim, Sungdong Kim, Yonghee Kim, Youngjun
Kim, Youngkwan Kim, Donghyeon Ko, Dughyun Lee, Ha Young Lee, Jaehong Lee, Jieun Lee,
Jonghyun Lee, Jongjin Lee, Min Young Lee, Yehbin Lee, Taehong Min, Yuri Min, Kiyoon
Moon, Hyangnam Oh, Jaesun Park, Kyuyon Park, Younghun Park, Hanbae Seo, Seunghyun Seo,
Mihyun Sim, Gyubin Son, Matt Yeo, Kyung Hoon Yeom, Wonjoon Yoo, Myungin You, Doheon
Ahn, Homin Ahn, Joohee Ahn, Seongmin Ahn, Chanwoo An, Hyeryun An, Junho An, SangMin An, Boram Byun, Eunbin Byun, Jongho Cha, Minji Chang, Seunggyu Chang, Haesong
Cho, Youngdo Cho, Dalnim Choi, Daseul Choi, Hyoseok Choi, Minseong Choi, Sangho Choi,
Seongjae Choi, Wooyong Choi, Sewhan Chun, Dong Young Go, Chiheon Ham, Danbi Han,
Jaemin Han, Moonyoung Hong, Sung Bum Hong, Dong-Hyun Hwang, Seongchan Hwang,
Jinbae Im, Hyuk Jin Jang, Jaehyung Jang, Jaeni Jang, Sihyeon Jang, Sungwon Jang, Joonha Jeon,
Daun Jeong, Joonhyun Jeong, Kyeongseok Jeong, Mini Jeong, Sol Jin, Hanbyeol Jo, Hanju
Jo, Minjung Jo, Chaeyoon Jung, Hyungsik Jung, Jaeuk Jung, Ju Hwan Jung, Kwangsun Jung,
Seungjae Jung, Soonwon Ka, Donghan Kang, Soyoung Kang, Taeho Kil, Areum Kim, Beomyoung Kim, Byeongwook Kim, Daehee Kim, Dong-Gyun Kim, Donggook Kim, Donghyun Kim,
Euna Kim, Eunchul Kim, Geewook Kim, Gyu Ri Kim, Hanbyul Kim, Heesu Kim, Isaac Kim,
Jeonghoon Kim, Jihye Kim, Joonghoon Kim, Minjae Kim, Minsub Kim, Pil Hwan Kim, Sammy
Kim, Seokhun Kim, Seonghyeon Kim, Soojin Kim, Soong Kim, Soyoon Kim, Sunyoung Kim,
Taeho Kim, Wonho Kim, Yoonsik Kim, You Jin Kim, Yuri Kim, Beomseok Kwon, Ohsung
Kwon, Yoo-Hwan Kwon, Anna Lee, Byungwook Lee, Changho Lee, Daun Lee, Dongjae Lee,
Ha-Ram Lee, Hodong Lee, Hwiyeong Lee, Hyunmi Lee, Injae Lee, Jaeung Lee, Jeongsang Lee,
Jisoo Lee, Jongsoo Lee, Joongjae Lee, Juhan Lee, Jung Hyun Lee, Junghoon Lee, Junwoo Lee,
Se Yun Lee, Sujin Lee, Sungjae Lee, Sungwoo Lee, Wonjae Lee, Zoo Hyun Lee, Jong Kun Lim,
Kun Lim, Taemin Lim, Nuri Na, Jeongyeon Nam, Kyeong-Min Nam, Yeonseog Noh, Biro Oh,
Jung-Sik Oh, Solgil Oh, Yeontaek Oh, Boyoun Park, Cheonbok Park, Dongju Park, Hyeonjin
Park, Hyun Tae Park, Hyunjung Park, Jihye Park, Jooseok Park, Junghwan Park, Jungsoo
Park, Miru Park, Sang Hee Park, Seunghyun Park, Soyoung Park, Taerim Park, Wonkyeong
Park, Hyunjoon Ryu, Jeonghun Ryu, Nahyeon Ryu, Soonshin Seo, Suk Min Seo, Yoonjeong
Shim, Kyuyong Shin, Wonkwang Shin, Hyun Sim, Woongseob Sim, Hyejin Soh, Bokyong
Son, Hyunjun Son, Seulah Son, Chi-Yun Song, Chiyoung Song, Ka Yeon Song, Minchul Song,
Seungmin Song, Jisung Wang, Yonggoo Yeo, Myeong Yeon Yi, Moon Bin Yim, Taehwan Yoo,
Youngjoon Yoo, Sungmin Yoon, Young Jin Yoon, Hangyeol Yu, Ui Seon Yu, Xingdong Zuo,
Jeongin Bae, Joungeun Bae, Hyunsoo Cho, Seonghyun Cho, Yongjin Cho, Taekyoon Choi, Yera
Choi, Jiwan Chung, Zhenghui Han, Byeongho Heo, Euisuk Hong, Taebaek Hwang, Seonyeol
Im, Sumin Jegal, Sumin Jeon, Yelim Jeong, Yonghyun Jeong, Can Jiang, Juyong Jiang, Jiho
Jin, Ara Jo, Younghyun Jo, Hoyoun Jung, Juyoung Jung, Seunghyeong Kang, Dae Hee Kim,
Ginam Kim, Hangyeol Kim, Heeseung Kim, Hyojin Kim, Hyojun Kim, Hyun-Ah Kim, Jeehye
Kim, Jin-Hwa Kim, Jiseon Kim, Jonghak Kim, Jung Yoon Kim, Rak Yeong Kim, Seongjin
Kim, Seoyoon Kim, Sewon Kim, Sooyoung Kim, Sukyoung Kim, Taeyong Kim, Naeun Ko,
Bonseung Koo, Heeyoung Kwak, Haena Kwon, Youngjin Kwon, Boram Lee, Bruce W. Lee,
Dagyeong Lee, Erin Lee, Euijin Lee, Ha Gyeong Lee, Hyojin Lee, Hyunjeong Lee, Jeeyoon
Lee, Jeonghyun Lee, Jongheok Lee, Joonhyung Lee, Junhyuk Lee, Mingu Lee, Nayeon Lee,
18

Sangkyu Lee, Se Young Lee, Seulgi Lee, Seung Jin Lee, Suhyeon Lee, Yeonjae Lee, Yesol
Lee, Youngbeom Lee, Yujin Lee, Shaodong Li, Tianyu Liu, Seong-Eun Moon, Taehong Moon,
Max-Lasse Nihlenramstroem, Wonseok Oh, Yuri Oh, Hongbeen Park, Hyekyung Park, Jaeho
Park, Nohil Park, Sangjin Park, Jiwon Ryu, Miru Ryu, Simo Ryu, Ahreum Seo, Hee Seo,
Kangdeok Seo, Jamin Shin, Seungyoun Shin, Heetae Sin, Jiangping Wang, Lei Wang, Ning
Xiang, Longxiang Xiao, Jing Xu, Seonyeong Yi, Haanju Yoo, Haneul Yoo, Hwanhee Yoo,
Liang Yu, Youngjae Yu, Weijie Yuan, Bo Zeng, Qian Zhou, Kyunghyun Cho, Jung-Woo Ha,
Joonsuk Park, Jihyun Hwang, Hyoung Jo Kwon, Soonyong Kwon, Jungyeon Lee, Seungho
Lee, Seonghyeon Lim, Hyunkyung Noh, Seungho Choi, Sang-Woo Lee, Jung Hwa Lim, and
Nako Sung. Hyperclova x technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01954, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.01954.
[35] Taha Zerrouki. qalsadi, arabic mophological analyzer library for python., 2012. URL https:
//pypi.python.org/pypi/qalsadi.
[36] Yi Zhou, Jose Camacho-Collados, and Danushka Bollegala. A predictive factor analysis
of social biases and task-performance in pretrained masked language models. In Houda
Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 11082–11100, Singapore, December 2023.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.683. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.683.
[37] Ahmet Üstün, Viraat Aryabumi, Zheng-Xin Yong, Wei-Yin Ko, Daniel D’souza, Gbemileke
Onilude, Neel Bhandari, Shivalika Singh, Hui-Lee Ooi, Amr Kayid, Freddie Vargus, Phil
Blunsom, Shayne Longpre, Niklas Muennighoff, Marzieh Fadaee, Julia Kreutzer, and Sara
Hooker. Aya model: An instruction finetuned open-access multilingual language model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.07827, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.07827.

Checklist
1. For all authors...
(a) Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
contributions and scope? [Yes] See Abstract and Section 1
(b) Did you describe the limitations of your work? [Yes] See Section 7
(c) Did you discuss any potential negative societal impacts of your work? [Yes] See
Section 7
(d) Have you read the ethics review guidelines and ensured that your paper conforms to
them? [Yes] See Section B.2
2. If you are including theoretical results...
(a) Did you state the full set of assumptions of all theoretical results? [N/A]
(b) Did you include complete proofs of all theoretical results? [N/A]
3. If you ran experiments (e.g. for benchmarks)...
(a) Did you include the code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experimental results (either in the supplemental material or as a URL)? [Yes] Link provided
in Abstract
(b) Did you specify all the training details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they
were chosen)? [Yes] See Appendix C.1
(c) Did you report error bars (e.g., with respect to the random seed after running experiments multiple times)? [Yes] See Figure 3b
(d) Did you include the total amount of compute and the type of resources used (e.g., type
of GPUs, internal cluster, or cloud provider)? [Yes] See Appendix C.1
4. If you are using existing assets (e.g., code, data, models) or curating/releasing new assets...
(a) If your work uses existing assets, did you cite the creators? [N/A]
(b) Did you mention the license of the assets? [N/A]
(c) Did you include any new assets either in the supplemental material or as a URL? [Yes]
URL in the Abstract.
19

(d) Did you discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose data you’re
using/curating? [Yes] See Appendix B.2
(e) Did you discuss whether the data you are using/curating contains personally identifiable
information or offensive content? [N/A]
5. If you used crowdsourcing or conducted research with human subjects...
(a) Did you include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if
applicable? [Yes] See Appendix B.4, B.5, and B.6
(b) Did you describe any potential participant risks, with links to Institutional Review
Board (IRB) approvals, if applicable? [Yes] See Appendix B.2
(c) Did you include the estimated hourly wage paid to participants and the total amount
spent on participant compensation? [Yes] See Appendix B.2

20

Appendix
A

Dataset Details

A.1

Accessibility, Usage, License, and Maintenance

Accessibility: All data samples of BLEND—including short answer questions, multiple-choice
questions, and their answers—as well as the codes we use in our work, can be found at https:
//github.com/nlee0212/BLEnD. We also make our dataset publicly available at HuggingFace
Datasets (https://huggingface.co/datasets/nayeon212/BLEnD).
Usage: In the GitHub repository, all the data samples for short-answer questions, including
the human-annotated answers, can be found in the data/ directory. Specifically, the annotations
from each country are included in the data/annotations/ directory, with the file names as
{country/region}_data.json. Each file includes a JSON variable with the unique question
IDs as keys, with the question in the local language and English, the human annotations both in the
local language and English, and their respective vote counts as values. The example of an instance in
the dataset for South Korea is shown below:
"Al-en-06": {
"question": "대한민국 학교 급식에서 흔히 볼 수 있는 음식은 무엇인가요?",
"en_question": "What is a common school cafeteria food in your country?",
"annotations": [
{
"answers": [
"김치"
],
"en_answers": [
"kimchi"
],
"count": 4
},
{
"answers": [
"밥",
"쌀밥",
"쌀"
],
"en_answers": [
"rice"
],
"count": 3
},
...
],
"idks": {
"idk": 0,
"no-answer": 0,
"not-applicable": 0,
"others": []
}
},
We also include the prompts that we used for LLM evaluation in local languages and English in
the data/prompts/ directory. Each file is named {country/region}_prompts.csv. For our final
evaluation, we have used inst-4 and pers-3 prompts, but we also provide other possible prompts
in each language for future work.
The topics and source language for each question can be found in the data/questions/ directory.
Each file is named {country/region}_questions.csv and includes question ID, topic, source
language, question in English, and the local language (in the Translation column) for all questions.
21

The code for retrieving answers from LLMs for the short-answer questions is provided at
model_inference.sh, where the users can modify the list of models, countries, and languages
(local language/English) to run the model inference. The results of each model’s inference on the
questions will be saved in default at model_inference_results/ directory. To calculate the scores
for the short-answer questions, the users can run evaluation/evaluate.sh.
The
multiple-choice
questions
and
their
answers
can
be
found
at
evaluation/mc_data/mc_questions_file.csv. Multiple-choice questions and answers
are generated through the codes found at evaluation/multiple_choice_generation.sh.
The code for evaluating LLMs on multiple-choice questions can be found at
evaluation/multiple_choice_evaluation.sh, where the users can modify the list of
models to evaluate. Users must input their API keys within these files for the required models for all
evaluations.
License: CC BY-SA 4.0
Maintenance: On GitHub, we plan to continually update our code and constantly resolve any bugs
and issues. We encourage contributions from community members and researchers.
A.2

Country/Region & Language Codes

Table 3 shows the two-letter ISO codes for each country/region and local language. We use the codes
throughout the main content of the paper and the supplementary materials.
Table 3: Two-letter ISO codes for each country/region and the corresponding local languages.

A.3

Country/Region

Code

United States
United Kingdom
China
Spain
Mexico
Indonesia
South Korea
North Korea
Greece
Iran
Algeria
Azerbaijan
West Java
Assam
Northern Nigeria
Ethiopia

US
GB
CN
ES
MX
ID
KR
KP
GR
IR
DZ
AZ
JB
AS
NG
ET

Language

Code

English

en

Chinese

zh

Spanish

es

Indonesian

id

Korean

ko

Greek
Persian
Arabic
Azerbaijani
Sundanese
Assamese
Hausa
Amharic

el
fa
ar
az
su
as
ha
am

Annotation Examples

The examples of annotations for cultural questions within each topic (i.e., food, sport, family,
education, holidays, and work-life) for each country/region in our dataset are shown in Figure 5,
Figure 6, Figure 7, Figure 8, Figure 9, and Figure 10 respectively. All the answers are presented in
both local languages and English.

B

Construction Details of BLEND

B.1

Resource Availability of Languages

As illustrated in the main text, we select languages with varying levels of resource availability and
recruit annotators who are native speakers of each language. The detailed resource availability of the
languages included in BLEND is shown in Table 4.
22

Question

Annotation

Country/
Region

What street food do people from the US like to eat?

hot dogs: 4
hamburger: 1
tacos: 1
…

US

What street food do people from the UK like to eat?

kebabs: 2
burgers: 2
fish and chips: 2
…

UK

中国人喜欢吃什么街头小吃？

烤肠 (roasted sausage): 3
烧烤 (barbecue): 2
糖葫芦 (candied haw): 1
…

CN

¿Qué comida callejera les gusta comer a las personas de
España?

churros (churros): 2
patatas fritas (French fries): 1
pipas (sunflower seeds): 1
…

ES

¿Qué comida callejera les gusta comer a las personas de
México?

tacos (tacos): 5
quesadillas (quesadillas): 3
tamales (tamales): 2
...

MX

Makanan jalanan apa yang disukai oleh orang-orang dari
Indonesia?

cilok (cilok): 3
bakso (meatball): 2
seblak (seblak): 1
…

ID

대한민국 사람들은 어떤 길거리 음식을 좋아하나요?

떡볶이 (stir-fried rice cakes): 4
붕어빵 (bungeoppang): 1
델리만쥬 (delimanjoo): 1
…

KR

북한 사람들은 어떤 거리 음식을 좋아 하나요?

두부밥 (tofu rice): 4
인조고기밥 (synthetic meat rice): 2
김밥 (gimbap): 1
…

KP

Τι street food συνηθίζουν να τρώνε οι άνθρωποι στην
Ελλάδα;

πιτόγυρο (pita gyro): 3
σουβλάκι (souvlaki): 1
πίτσα (pizza): 1

GR

‫مردم درایران چه غذاهای خیابانی دوست دارند بخورند؟‬

‫( فالفل‬falafel): 2
‫( سمبوسه‬samosa): 1
‫( پیراشکی‬pastry): 1
…

IR

‫أي نوع من األكالت الشعبیة یحب الجزائریون تناولها؟‬

‫( الكسكس‬couscous): 4
‫( الشخشوخة‬chakhchoukha): 2
‫( الرشتة‬rishta): 1
…

DZ

Azərbaycanlılar küçə yeməklərindən nə yeməyi
xoşlayırlar?

dönər (doner kebab): 5

AZ

Jajanan jalanan naon nu resep didahar ku urang Jawa
Barat?

cilok (cilok): 2
baso (meatball): 2
mi hayam (chicken noodle):1
…

JB

অসমীয় ল োকে সোধোৰণকে কে ধৰণৰ ৰোস্তোৰ খোদ্য লখোৱো পছন্দ
েকৰ?

ফু চেো (panipuri): 4
ম’ম (dumpling): 4
চোহ (tea): 1
…

AS

Wane irin abincin titi ne mutanen Arewacin Najeriya suka
fi son ci?

awara (fried bean cake): 3
gurasa(flatbread): 2
shinkafa (rice): 1
…

NG

ኢትዮጵያውያን ምን የጎዳና ምግብ ይወዳሉ?

ችፕስ (chips): 4
ቆሎ (qollo): 2

ET

Figure 5: Example annotations for a cultural question related to the topic of food for each country/region in our dataset. The questions and annotations are provided in different languages, with
translations of the annotated answers into English included in brackets. Annotations are sorted in
descending order based on the frequency (i.e., vote count) of an answer provided by annotators, each
separated by a line break. The vote count for each answer is displayed as numbers.
23

Question

Annotation

Country/
Region

What is the most popular indoor sport in the US?

basketball: 5
hockey: 1

US

What is the most popular indoor sport in the UK?

swimming: 2
netball: 2
badminton: 1
…

UK

中国最受欢迎的室内运动是什么？

乒乓球 (table tennis): 3
羽毛球 (badminton): 2
电竞 (e-sports): 1

CN

¿Cuál es el deporte de interior más popular en España?

baloncesto (basketball): 2
futbol sala (indoor football): 2
fútbol 7 (7-a-side football): 1
…

ES

¿Cuál es el deporte de interior más popular en México?

basquetbal (basketball): 3
natación (swimming): 1
box (boxing): 1
...

MX

Apa olahraga dalam ruangan yang paling populer di
Indonesia?

bulutangkis (badminton): 4
futsal (futsal): 2
ping pong (table tennis): 1
…

ID

대한민국에서 가장 인기 있는 실내 스포츠는 무엇인가요?

클라이밍 (climbing): 2
배드민턴 (badminton): 1
농구 (basketball): 1
…

KR

북한에서 좋아 하는 실내 체육운동은 무엇인가요?

탁구 (table tennis): 3
롱구 (basketball): 2
배구 (volleyball): 1
…

KP

Ποιο είναι το πιο δημοφιλές άθλημα εσωτερικού χώρου
στην Ελλάδα;

μπάσκετ (basketball): 4
ποδόσφαιρο (football): 1

GR

‫محبوب‌ترین ورزش سرپوشیده در‌ایران چیست؟‬

‫( والیبال‬volleyball): 2
‫( فوتسال‬futsal): 2
‫( بسکتبال‬basketball): 1
…

IR

‫ما‌هي‌أشهر‌ریاضة‌قاعة‌في‌الجزائر؟‬

‫( المالكمة‬boxing): 2
‫( كرة‌الید‬handball): 1
‫( كرة‌الطائرة‬volleyball): 1
…

DZ

Azərbaycanda ən populyar qapalı idman növü hansıdır?

şahmat (chess): 3
basketbol (basketball): 1

AZ

Naon olahraga jero rohangan nu pang populerna di Jawa
Barat?

bulu tangkis (badminton): 4
futsal (futsal): 2
pingpong (table tennis):1
…

JB

অসমত কি সবাততাকি জনকিয় ইনড'ৰ ক্ৰীডা কি?

লুডু (ludo): 4
কিৰম (carrom): 3
দবা (chess): 2
…

AS

Wanne wasan cikin gida da aka fi so a Arewacin
Najeriya?

kwallon kafa (football): 1
kacici-kacici (riddle): 1

NG

በኢትዮጵያ የትኛው ዓይነት የቤት ውስጥ ስፖርት በጣም ታዋቂ ነው?

idk (I don’t know): 3
ቦክስ (boxing): 1

ET

Figure 6: Example annotations for a cultural question related to the topic of sport for each country/region in our dataset. The questions and annotations are provided in different languages, with
translations of the annotated answers into English included in brackets. Annotations are sorted in
descending order based on the frequency (i.e., vote count) of an answer provided by annotators, each
separated by a line break. The vote count for each answer is displayed as numbers.
24

Question

Annotation

Country/
Region

What is a popular family activity with a child
to do on weekends in the US?

go to a park: 2
bowling: 1
swim: 1
…

US

What is a popular family activity with a child
to do on weekends in the UK?

go to the zoo: 2
go to the park: 2
walks: 1
…

UK

在中国，周末和孩子一起做的一项受欢迎
的家庭活动是什么？

去公园 (go to a park): 2
逛街 (shopping): 1
室外活动 (outdoor activities): 1
…

CN

¿Cuál es una actividad familiar popular
para hacer con un niño los fines de semana
en España?

ir al parque (go to the park): 2
pasear (to walk): 2
jugar a videojuegos (play video games): 1
…

ES

¿Cuál es una actividad familiar popular
para hacer con un niño los fines de semana
en México?

ir al parque (go to the park): 5
visitar a la abuelita (visit grandma): 1
ir al cine (go to the movies): 1

MX

Apa kegiatan keluarga yang populer untuk
dilakukan bersama anak pada akhir pekan
di Indonesia?

jalan-jalan ke mall (going to the mall): 3
bersepeda (cycling): 2
nonton tv (watch tv): 1
…

ID

대한민국에서 주말에 아이와 함께하는 인기
있는 가족 활동은 무엇인가요?

여행 (travel): 2
스포츠 (sports): 1
보드 게임 (board game): 1
…

KR

북한에서 휴식일에 아이와 함께하는 많이
하는 가족 활동은 무엇인가요?

사사끼 (card game): 1
장마당가기 (go to the market): 1
영화보기 (watching movie): 1
…

KP

Ποια είναι μια δημοφιλής οικογενειακή
δραστηριότητα με ένα παιδί για τα
σαββατοκύριακα στην Ελλάδα;

βόλτα (stroll): 1
κινηματογράφος (cinima): 1
παιδική χαρά (playground): 1

GR

‫درایران یک فعالیت خانوادگی محبوب با فرزند برای انجام‬
‫دادن در آخر هفتهها چیست؟‬

‫( پیک نیک در پارک‬picnic in the park): 1
‫( سفر‬travel): 1
‫( مهمانی‬party): 1
…

IR

‫ما هي النشاطات العائلیة الشائعة التي یمكن القیام بها مع‬
‫األطفال في عطلة نهایة األسبوع في الجزائر؟‬

‫( التنزه‬hiking): 5

DZ

Azərbaycanda həftə sonları ailə ilə birlikdə
uşaqla nə etmək populyardır?

parklara getmək (go to parks): 3
oyun meydançalarına getmək (go to playgrounds): 1
bağ evinə getmək (go to the country house): 1
…

AZ

Naon kagiatan kulawarga anu populer
dipigawe babarengan jeung budak pikeun
dilakukeun dina ahir minggu di Jawa Barat?

olahraga (sports): 1
lalajo tipi (watching tv): 1
ngojay (swimming):1
…

JB

অসমত সপ্তাহান্তত শিশুসহ পশিযালে শি জনশিয
িাম িলি?

ফু শিব যায (go for a walk): 3
গালদে শনিং (gardening): 1
শপিশনিলে যায (picnic): 1

AS

Menene shahararren aikin gida da yara suka
fi so suyi a karshen mako a Arewacin
Najeriya?

shara (sweep): 3
wanki (washing): 1

NG

በኢትዮጵያ በሳምንት መጨረሻ ቤተሰብ ከልጅ ጋር
ለመስራት የታወቀ እንቅስቃሴ ምንድን ነው?

ሩጫ (running): 2
ልብስ ማጠብ (washing clothes): 1
ቤት ማጽዳት (house cleaning)

ET

Figure 7: Example annotations for a cultural question related to the topic of family for each country/region in our dataset. The questions and annotations are provided in different languages, with
translations of the annotated answers into English included in brackets. Annotations are sorted in
descending order based on the frequency (i.e., vote count) of an answer provided by annotators, each
separated by a line break. The vote count for each answer is displayed as numbers.
25

Question

Annotation

Country/
Region

What language is taught in schools in the US besides
English?

spanish: 5
french: 3
german: 2
…

US

What language is taught in schools in the UK besides
English?

french: 5
spanish: 3
german: 2

UK

在中国的学校里除了英语之外还教授哪种语言？

中文 (chinese): 4

CN

¿Qué idioma se enseña en las escuelas de España
además del inglés?

francés (french): 5
latin (latin): 2
aleman (german): 1
…

ES

¿Qué idioma se enseña en las escuelas de México
además del inglés?

francés (french): 4
español (spanish): 2
nahuatl (nahuatl): 1
...

MX

Bahasa apa yang diajarkan di sekolah-sekolah di
Indonesia selain Bahasa Inggris?

bahasa indonesia (indonesian): 2
mandarin (mandarin): 2
bahasa daerah (regional language): 1
…

ID

대한민국의 학교에서 학생들은 영어 외에 어떤 언어를
배우나요?

일본어 (japanese): 4
중국어 (chinese): 3
불어 (french): 1

KR

북한의 학교에서 학생들은 영어 외에 어떤 외국어를
배우나요?

중국어 (chinese): 4
러시아어 (russian language): 3
한문 (chinese characters): 1

KP

Ποια γλώσσα διδάσκεται στα σχολεία στην Ελλάδα
πέρα από τα Αγγλικά;

γερμανικά (german): 5
γαλλικά (french): 5
ελληνικά (greek): 1

GR

‫ چه زبانهایی در مدارس تدریس داده میشود؟‬،‫درایران به جز انگلیسی‬

‫( عربی‬arabic): 4
‫( انگلیسی‬english): 1
‫( فرانسه‬france): 1
…

IR

‫أي لغة تُدرَّ س في المدارس الجزائریة باإلضافة إلى اللغة اإلنجلیزیة؟‬

‫( الفرنسیة‬french): 5

DZ

Azərbaycanda məktəblərdə ingilis dilindən başqa hansı
dillər tədris edilir?

rus dili (russian): 5
alman dili (german): 2
fransız dili (french): 1

AZ

Basa naon nu diajarkeun di sakola-sakola di Jawa Barat
salian ti Basa Inggris?

basa indonesia (indonesian language): 4
basa sunda (sundanese language): 2
jepang (japanese language):2
…

JB

অসমৰ বিদ্যালয়সমূহত ইংৰাজীৰ উপবৰও আন ক ান ভাষা
বিক্ষা বদ্য়া হয়?

বহন্দী (hindi): 5
সংস্কৃ ত (sanskrit): 2
অসমীয়া (assamese): 2
…

AS

Wane yare ake koyarwa a makarantun Arewacin
Najeriya banda Turanci?

hausa (hausa): 4
larabci (arabic): 4

NG

በኢትዮጵያ ትምህርት ቤቶች ከእንግሊዝኛ ቋንቋ በተጨማሪ ምን ይማራል?

አማርኛ (amharic): 4
ኦሮምኛ (oromic): 1

ET

Figure 8: Example annotations for a cultural question related to the topic of educate for each
country/region in our dataset. The questions and annotations are provided in different languages,
with translations of the annotated answers into English included in brackets. Annotations are sorted
in descending order based on the frequency (i.e., vote count) of an answer provided by annotators,
each separated by a line break. The vote count for each answer is displayed as numbers.
26

Question

Annotation

Country/
Region

On which holiday do all family members tend to reunite
in the US?

thanksgiving: 4
christmas: 2

US

On which holiday do all family members tend to reunite
in the UK?

christmas: 5

UK

在中国，哪个节日家里的所有成员会团聚？

春节 (spring festival): 4
中秋节 (mid-autumn festival): 4
清明 (qingming): 1

CN

¿En qué festivo suelen reunirse todos los miembros de
la familia en España?

navidad (christmas): 3
nochebuena (christmas eve): 2
nochevieja (new year's eve): 2
…

ES

¿En qué festividad suelen reunirse todos los miembros
de la familia en México?

navidad (christmas): 5
año nuevo (new year): 3
16 de septiembre (september 16th): 1
...

MX

Pada hari libur apa semua anggota keluarga biasanya
berkumpul di Indonesia?

idul fitri (eid al-fitr): 4
natal (christmas):3
tahun baru (new year): 2
…

ID

대한민국에서 모든 가족 구성원들이 함께 모이는
명절은 무엇이 있나요?

추석 (chuseok): 5
설날 (lunar new year): 5

KR

북한에서 모든 가족 식구들이 함께 모이는 명절은
무엇이 있나요?

추석 (chuseok): 3
설날 (lunar new year): 2
양력설 (gregorian new year): 1
…

KP

Σε ποια εορτή συνηθίζουν όλα τα μέλη της οικογένειας
να επανασυνδέονται στην Ελλάδα;

πάσχα (easter): 4
χριστούγεννα (christmas): 3
γενέθλια (birthday): 1

GR

‫در ایران در کدام تعطیالت همه اعضای خانواده معموالً دور هم جمع‬
‫میشوند؟‬

‫( نوروز‬new year): 4
‫( چهارشنبه سوری‬chaharshanbe suri): 1
‫( سیزده بدر‬nature's day): 1
…

IR

‫في أي عید یجتمع أفراد العائلة في الجزائر؟‬

‫( عید الفطر‬eid al-fitr): 5
‫( عید االضحى‬eid al-adha): 4
‫( رأس السنة‬new year): 1

DZ

Azərbaycanda ailə üzvləri hansı bayramda bir araya
gəlirlər?

novruz bayramı (novruz): 5
yeni ̇ ıl bayramı (new year): 1

AZ

Dina liburan naon sadaya anggota kulawarga biasana
ngariung deui di Jawa Barat?

idul fitri (eid al-fitr): 4
libur lebaran (eid holiday): 1
natal (christmas):1
…

JB

অসমত ককোন উৎসৱত সকললো পৰিয়োলি সদসযসকল একৰিত
হ'বলল প্ৰৱণ হয়?

ৰবহু (bihu): 5
পুজো (puja): 1
দুৰ্গো পুজো (durga puja): 2

AS

A wane hutun ne dukkan 'yan uwa sukan hadu a
Arewacin Najeriya?

hutun sallah (eid holiday): 4
hutun kistimeti (christmas): 3

NG

በኢትዮጵያ በየትኛው በዓል ሁሉም ቤተሰቦች በአንድ ላይ ለመሆን ይሻሉ?

ፋሲካ (easter): 2
ረመዳን (ramadan): 1
ዘመን መለወጫ (new year)

ET

Figure 9: Example annotations for a cultural question related to the topic of holiday for each
country/region in our dataset. The questions and annotations are provided in different languages,
with translations of the annotated answers into English included in brackets. Annotations are sorted
in descending order based on the frequency (i.e., vote count) of an answer provided by annotators,
each separated by a line break. The vote count for each answer is displayed as numbers.
27

Question

Annotation

Country/
Region

What is regarded as the most important perk
typically offered to employees in the US?

vacation: 3
healthcare: 3
benefits: 1
…

US

What is regarded as the most important perk
typically offered to employees in the UK?

bonus: 2
free lunches: 1
pension: 1
…

UK

在中国，通常认为给员工提供的最重要的福
利是什么？

五险一金 (five insurances and one fund): 3
双休 (weekends off): 2
年假: annual leave: 1
…

CN

¿Cuál se considera el beneficio más
importante que se ofrece típicamente a los
empleados en España?

la seguridad social (social security): 2
salario (salary): 1
tiempo libre (free time): 1
…

ES

¿Cuál se considera el beneficio más
importante que se ofrece típicamente a los
empleados en México?

imss (mexican social security institute): 2
vacaciones pagadas (paid vacations): 2
afore (retirement fund administration companies): 1
...

MX

Apa yang dianggap sebagai keuntungan
paling penting yang biasanya ditawarkan
kepada karyawan di Indonesia?

gaji (salary): 3
thr (religious holiday allowance): 1
bonus tahunan (annual bonus): 1
…

ID

대한민국에서 일반적으로 직원들에게
제공되는 혜택 중 가장 중요하게 여겨지는
것은 무엇인가요?

보너스 (bonus): 2
직원가 할인 (employee discount): 2
휴가 (vacation): 1
...

KR

북한에서 일반적으로 로동자들에게 주는
사회급양, 표창 및 휴양소 휴가 중 가장
중요하게 여기는 것은 무엇인가요?

사회급양 (social distribution): 2
휴양소 휴가 (resort vacation): 1
표창 휴가 (commendation): 1

KP

Ποιο θεωρείται το σημαντικότερο προνόμιο
που συνήθως προσφέρεται στους
εργαζομένους στην Ελλάδα;

ασφάλιση (insurance): 2
κοντινές διακοπές (short breaks): 1
άδεια (days off): 1

GR

‫در ایران مهم ترین مزیتی که معموالً به کارمندان ارائه‬
‫ چیست؟‬،‫میشود‬

‫( بیمه‬insurance): 2
‫( حقوق بازنشستگی‬pension): 1
‫( پاداش اضافه کار‬overtime bonus): 1

IR

‫ما هي أهم میزة تُقدم عادة ً للموظفین في الجزائر؟‬

‫( الراتب‬salary): 2
‫( عالوة‬allowance): 2
‫( سیارة وظیفة‬official car): 1

DZ

Azərbaycanda işçilərə adətən təklif edilən
ən önəmli imtiyaz nə hesab olunur?

uzun məzuniyyət (long vacation): 1
rütbə artımı (promotion): 1
maaş (salary): 1

AZ

Naon nu dianggap minangka kauntungan
pang pentingna nu biasana ditawarkeun ka
karyawan di Jawa Barat?

asuransi kasihata (health insurance): 2
gajih (salary): 1
bonus (bonus): 1
…

JB

অসমত কমমচাৰীসকলক সাধাৰণতত দিযা
সবাততাকক গুৰুত্বপূণম সুদবধাত া দক দিচাতপ গণয
কৰা িয?

স্বাস্থ্য বীমা সুদবধা (health insurance benefit): 2
দবনামূলীযা দচদকৎসা (free treatment): 1

AS

Menene ake dauka a matsayin mafi
muhimmancin alawus da ake bayarwa ga
ma'aikata a Arewacin Najeriya?

kuɗi (money): 2

NG

በኢትዮጵያ ለሠራተኞች ተለይቶ የሚቀርብ እና እጅግ ዋና
የሆነ ተጨማሪ አበል ምንድነው?

የቤት አበል (housing allowance): 2
ውሎ አበል (allowance): 1
ቦነስ (bonus): 1

ET

Figure 10: Example annotations for a cultural question related to the topic of work life for each
country/region in our dataset. The questions and annotations are provided in different languages,
with translations of the annotated answers into English included in brackets. Annotations are sorted
in descending order based on the frequency (i.e., vote count) of an answer provided by annotators,
each separated by a line break. The vote count for each answer is displayed as numbers.
28

Table 4: Resource availability of the 13 languages covered in BLEND. The resource availability is
defined by [12].
Class

Languages

1 - The Left-Behinds
2 - The Hopefuls
3 - The Rising Stars
4 - The Underdogs
5 - The Winners

Assamese, Azerbaijani, Sundanese
Amharic, Hausa
Greek, Indonesian
Korean, Persian
Arabic, Chinese (Mandarin), English, Spanish

Table 5: Annotator demographics for each country or region who are recruited via Prolific.

B.2

US

GB

CN

ES

ID

GR

MX

IR

No. of Annotators

87

119

59

91

40

86

86

50

Gender (%)
Female
Male
Non-binary
Prefer not to say

42.53
52.87
4.60
-

46.22
49.58
2.52
1.68

55.93
44.07
-

49.45
49.45
1.10
-

50.00
50.00
-

45.35
54.65
-

48.84
48.84
2.33
-

56.00
42.00
2.00
-

Age (%)
-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60+

36.78
19.54
17.24
14.94
11.49

13.45
26.89
21.01
21.85
16.81

64.41
25.42
3.39
6.78
-

41.76
23.08
18.68
14.29
2.20

45.00
35.00
12.50
7.50
-

50.00
29.07
13.95
6.98
-

59.30
26.74
8.14
4.65
1.16

48.00
44.00
8.00
-

Duration of Residence
in Target Country (%)
100%
≥ 90%
≥ 80%
≥ 70%
≥ 60%
≥ 50%

55.17
9.20
13.79
6.90
9.20
5.75

75.63
7.56
5.04
3.36
5.04
2.52

1.69
28.81
23.73
15.25
25.42
5.08

75.82
10.99
5.49
5.49
2.20
-

5.00
25.00
20.00
17.50
12.50
20.00

86.05
1.16
6.98
5.81
-

75.58
16.28
2.33
4.65
1.16
-

8.00
34.00
22.00
20.00
10.00
6.00

Education Level (%)
Below High School
High School
College
Bachelor
Master’s Degree
Doctorate

11.49
22.99
47.13
18.39
-

0.84
12.61
21.85
48.74
13.45
2.52

6.78
3.39
35.59
38.98
15.25

3.30
12.09
16.48
40.66
21.98
5.49

20.00
2.50
30.00
40.00
7.50

13.95
11.63
40.70
25.58
8.14

15.12
4.65
66.28
11.63
2.33

2.00
4.00
10.00
32.00
46.00
6.00

Ethical Considerations of Annotator Recruitment

This research project was performed under approval from KAIST IRB (KH2023-226). We obtained
‘Informed Consent for Human Subjects’ from the annotators. We embedded the consent document
within the annotation website for the crowdworkers or received written consent from the directly
recruited annotators. The annotations were gathered only from those who had read and consented
to the form. We recruited annotators without any discrimination based on age, ethnicity, disability,
or gender. Workers were compensated at a rate exceeding Prolific’s ethical standards 9 . These same
standards were applied to workers directly recruited for the annotation of low-resource languages.
Participants could voluntarily decide to join or withdraw from the study, and any data provided would
not be used for research purposes if they withdraw. Additionally, the annotators were notified that if
an unexpected situation arises during participation, appropriate actions will be taken according to
the situation, and documents complying with the requirements of the KAIST IRB will be promptly
prepared and reported.
9

https://www.prolific.com/resources/how-much-should-you-pay-research-participants

29

Table 6: Annotator demographics for each country or region who are recruited directly.
KR

DZ

AZ

KP

No. of Annotators

B.3

JB

AS

NG

ET

5

Gender (%)
Female
Male
Non-binary
Prefer not to say

60.00
40.00
-

40.00
60.00
-

40.00
60.00
-

80.00
20.00
-

40.00
60.00
-

100.00
-

60.00
40.00
-

100.00
-

Age (%)
-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60+

60.00
40.00
-

20.00
60.00
20.00
-

100.00
-

40.00
60.00
-

100.00
-

60.00
40.00
-

60.00
40.00
-

60.00
40.00
-

Duration of Residence
in Target Country (%)
100%
≥ 90%
≥ 80%
≥ 70%
≥ 60%
≥ 50%
< 50%

20.00
40.00
20.00
20.00
-

80.00
20.00
-

80.00
20.00
-

20.00
20.00
60.00

80.00
20.00
-

80.00
20.00
-

80.00
20.00
-

100.00
-

Education Level (%)
Below High School
High School
College
Bachelor
Master’s Degree
Doctorate

60.00
40.00
-

40.00
40.00
20.00

80.00
20.00
-

20.00
20.00
60.00
-

40.00
60.00
-

20.00
80.00
-

20.00
60.00
20.00
-

20.00
80.00
-

Annotator Demographics

The statistics of all annotators participating in our dataset construction are shown in Table 5 and 6.

30

Table 7: Average of maximum votes among all answers for each question in different categories
across countries. A value of ‘3.00’ indicates that, on average, three annotators provided the same
answer for each question.
Category

US

GB

ES

MX

ID

CN

KR

DZ

GR

IR

KP

AZ

JB

AS

NG

ET

Food
Sport
Family
Education
Holidays
Work-life

3.12
3.35
3.17
3.24
3.09
3.10

3.14
3.47
3.40
3.26
3.33
3.19

2.99
3.57
3.17
3.30
3.18
3.09

3.27
3.53
3.16
3.19
3.28
3.00

2.93
3.59
3.16
3.21
3.14
3.22

2.67
3.07
3.08
3.25
3.04
3.15

3.28
3.57
3.40
3.63
3.60
3.57

3.29
3.09
2.94
3.18
3.04
3.31

2.91
3.30
3.19
3.29
2.98
2.87

2.99
3.59
3.17
3.20
3.20
3.09

2.61
2.89
2.81
3.27
3.07
3.01

3.19
3.24
3.25
3.42
3.27
3.59

3.01
3.47
2.94
3.45
3.10
3.10

3.14
2.97
3.19
3.10
2.92
3.25

2.72
2.98
2.65
2.94
2.60
2.75

3.04
3.18
2.78
3.23
3.12
3.12

Overall

3.18

3.29

3.22

3.25

3.20

3.02

3.50

3.15

3.08

3.21

2.93

3.31

3.18

3.08

2.78

3.09

B.4

Question Construction Guidelines

Below are the annotation guidelines for creating the question templates in BLEND.
The goal of this task is to write question-and-answer pairs that ask about your country’s culture.
In each spreadsheet, you need to write down the questions and the corresponding answers to
each question. Write them down in your native language, and add their translation into English
too in the spreadsheet provided.
Please find below a few guidelines to take into account when writing the questions:
• Questions and answers should be a culture specific question related to your culture
(can be a common sense question). For example, a question related to the sport topic
could be “What is the most popular sport in your country?”. You should refrain from
writing factual questions as much as possible.
• Do not generate yes or no questions or answers that only have two options (e.g.
male or female). You could convert a yes or no question to a question starting with
question words. Instead of asking “‘Do people in your country tend to get off work at
5:30 pm?", you may ask “What time do people in your country tend to get off work?".
• Please write questions distinct from each other as much as possible under each
topic.
• The answer should be short and concrete. It is better to use precise concepts, entities,
time, etc. to answer each question.
• Please avoid asking questions about a very stereotypical topic. For instance, avoid
questions like “Who bears more responsibility for taking care of children at home in
your country?"
B.5

Answer Annotation Guidelines

Figure 11 shows the annotation guidelines given to the annotators for all countries/regions. We
provided guidelines, all in their local languages.
B.6

Answer Annotation Interface

Figure 12 shows the annotation interface shown to the crowdworkers annotators in Prolific. We used
an Excel sheet for annotators recruited by direct recruitment for the annotations (i.e., for low-resource
languages).
B.7

Annotation Analysis

Table 7 shows the level of agreement between the annotators, calculated by averaging the maximum
votes among answers for each question in different categories across countries. Additionally, Table 8
shows the average number of answers per questions per categories across countries. Lastly, Table 9
shows the average number of I don’t know per questions per categories across countries.
31

Figure 11: Answer annotation guidelines shown to the annotators.
Table 8: Average number of annotations for each question in different categories across countries.
A value of ‘3.00’ indicates that, on average, three answers were provided as the answer for each
question.
Category

US

GB

ES

MX

ID

CN

KR

DZ

GR

IR

KP

AZ

JB

AS

NG

ET

Food
Sport
Family
Education
Holidays
Work Life

4.93
4.06
4.41
3.93
4.40
4.44

4.40
3.82
3.44
3.23
3.62
3.93

4.80
3.60
3.71
3.49
3.77
3.71

5.36
3.49
4.78
3.90
4.40
4.44

5.03
3.72
4.32
3.89
4.15
4.28

4.64
4.13
3.81
3.57
4.04
4.10

3.48
2.72
2.84
2.81
2.41
2.54

3.15
2.13
2.38
2.55
2.42
2.84

4.54
3.25
3.38
3.32
3.57
3.63

4.53
3.16
3.43
3.25
3.41
3.84

4.21
3.58
3.60
3.52
3.20
3.60

3.30
2.14
2.86
2.71
2.46
2.49

3.94
2.55
2.48
3.11
3.12
3.09

5.20
3.90
4.46
4.74
5.14
4.21

3.23
2.16
2.63
2.94
2.49
2.74

3.02
2.00
2.59
2.49
2.57
2.56

Overall

4.38

3.77

3.89

4.41

4.25

4.08

2.83

2.60

3.66

3.64

3.64

2.67

3.10

4.65

2.71

2.55

C

Experimental Settings for LLM Evaluation

C.1

Models

We use GPT-4 (gpt-4-1106-preview) [24], GPT-3.5 (gpt-3.5-turbo-1106) 10 , Claude-3Opus (claude-3-opus-20240229), Claude-3-Sonnet (claude-3-sonnet-20240229), Claude-3Haiku (claude-3-haiku-20240307) 11 , Llama-3.1-70B (Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct) 12 , PaLM2
(text-bison-002) [2], Gemini-1.0-Pro [30], C4AI Command R+ 13 , C4AI Command R 14 , Qwen10

https://platform.openai.com/docs/models
https://www.anthropic.com/api
12
https://huggingface.co/meta-llama/Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct
13
https://docs.cohere.com/reference/about
14
https://huggingface.co/CohereForAI/c4ai-command-r-v01
11

32

Figure 12: Annotation interface given to the annotators.
Table 9: Average number of I don’t know for each question in different categories across countries. A
value of ‘1.00’ indicates that, on average, one of the annotators failed to provide the answer to the
question.
Category

US

GB

ES

MX

ID

CN

KR

DZ

GR

IR

KP

AZ

JB

AS

NG

ET

Food
Sport
Family
Education
Holidays
Work Life

0.80
1.58
1.24
0.92
1.42
0.71

0.71
1.70
1.24
1.02
1.50
1.10

0.49
1.22
1.03
0.83
1.33
0.91

0.36
1.11
0.51
0.39
0.71
0.63

0.56
1.08
0.92
0.48
0.68
0.43

0.68
0.92
0.81
0.37
1.23
0.69

0.23
0.31
0.40
0.24
0.88
0.49

1.00
1.65
1.33
0.82
1.91
0.62

0.52
1.41
1.13
0.58
1.24
1.13

0.90
1.67
1.29
0.52
1.38
1.16

1.24
1.44
1.30
0.51
1.80
1.29

0.58
1.64
0.71
0.37
1.25
0.60

1.15
1.69
1.59
0.69
1.47
1.22

0.54
1.01
0.63
0.25
0.93
0.63

1.69
2.16
2.13
1.42
2.48
1.59

0.81
1.53
1.16
0.61
1.10
0.68

Total

1.11

1.20

0.95

0.62

0.69

0.79

0.42

1.24

0.98

1.15

1.27

0.87

1.29

0.67

1.91

0.98

1.5-72B/32B/14B-Chat [5], SeaLLM-7B-v2.5 [23], HyperCLOVA X [34], Aya-23 [4] and Aya101 [37] for evaluation of cultural sensitivity of LLMs.
8 Quadro RTX 8000 48GB were used with CUDA version 11.8 for all experiments. For all models, we
use greedy decoding (temperature=0, top_p=1.0). We use the PyTorch library 15 for all experiments.
C.2

Short Answer Question

C.2.1

Prompt for Short Answer Evaluation

We use two types of prompts to evaluate the LLMs in short answer settings: 1) directly ask LLMs to
provide the answer and 2) add persona to the LLMs to make them act as a person from the target
country or region. The details of each prompt are as follows:
PROMPT #1:
Read the following question and provide a single answer without any explanations.

15

https://pytorch.org/

33

Question: {QUESTION}
Answer:
PROMPT #2:
You are a person from {COUNTRY/REGION} who is trying to explain your country’s culture to
a foreigner. Answer the following question, providing a single answer without any explanations.
{QUESTION}
C.2.2

Details of Short Answer Evaluation

Let Q denote the question set, Aq the annotated answer set for each question q ∈ Q, with each answer
a ∈ Aq , for a question q in the country or region c in the human annotation. For any LLM prediction
y, we define sq,c (y) as

1, if ∃a ∈ Aq such that a ⊆ y
sq,c (y) =
(1)
0, otherwise
so that sq,c (y) is 1 if the prediction y includes any of the answers from the human annotations,
denoted as a ⊆ y, and 0 otherwise. For a model m that outputs fm (q, c) when given q and c, the
score S(c) for each country or region c is calculated as
1 X
S(c) =
sq,c (fm (q, c)) × 100.
(2)
|Q|
q∈Q

To evaluate LLM responses, we lemmatize/stem/tokenize the annotations and LLM responses for each
question to consider the language variations. We use one of the three techniques that are available for
each language.
We use the lemmatizer from the English model from SpaCy (en_core_web_sm) for English. For
Spanish and Amharic, we use lemmatizers from SparkNLP 16 . For Indonesian, we use the lemmatizer
from Kumparan NLP Library 17 . For Chinese, we use jieba 18 , a Chinese word segmentation module.
For Korean, we use the Okt lemmatizer from the konlpy package 19 . For Arabic, we use Qalsadi
Arabic Lemmatizer [35]. For Greek, we use the CLTK Greek lemmatizer [11]. For Persian, we use
Hazm, a Persian NLP Toolkit 20 . For Azerbaijani, we use the Azerbaijani Language Stemmer 21 . We
use SUSTEM, a Sundanese Stemmer [27] for Sundanese. We use the Assamese tokenizer from Indic
NLP Library [16] for Assamese. For Hausa, we use the Hausa Stemmer [6].
C.3
C.3.1

Multiple Choice Question
Multiple Choice Question Construction

To create plausible incorrect answer options for questions about the target country/region, we first
consider all answer annotations from all other countries with at least two votes. Then, we sort these
answer candidates by their vote count from each country/region. Next, we check each candidate to
see if it is similar to any annotations collected from the target country/region. If it is, we block that
candidate from being added as a wrong answer choice, as well as the same answer from the other
countries/regions. We use GPT-4 to determine if two words are similar in meaning, such as ‘fruit’
and ‘apple’, as the two can be considered the same when answering the question. The prompt can be
seen in Appendix C.3.2.
As this process would lead to differing possible wrong answer options for each target country per
question, we pick the answer options with the minimum number of possible wrong answer options

among all countries. If there are n possible answer choices, we include all combinations of n3 if
16

Spanish lemmatizer (https://sparknlp.org/2020/02/16/lemma_es.html), Amharic lemmatizer
(https://sparknlp.org/2021/01/20/lemma_am.html)
17
https://github.com/kumparan/nlp-id/tree/v0.1.9.9
18
https://github.com/fxsjy/jieba?tab=readme-ov-file
19
https://konlpy.org/en/latest/api/konlpy.tag/
20
https://github.com/roshan-research/hazm
21
https://github.com/aznlp-disc/stemmer

34

n ≥ 3, or include all n answer choices plus 3 − n dummy options otherwise. We use GPT-4 (see
Appendix C.3.2 for the prompt details) to produce dummy answer options to make the number of
options comprised of one correct answer and three wrong answer options four. If there are multiple
correct answers, we generate multiple versions of the question, each with a different correct answer.
The choices are provided in alphabetical order when asked to LLMs in a multiple-choice format.
C.3.2

Prompt for Multiple Choice Question Construction

Similar Term Detection. Since we asked the human annotators to provide answers in a short answer
format, there may be cases where different textual answers refer to the same meaning. To avoid
duplicate options in multiple-choice format, we utilized GPT-4 to determine whether the answers
have the same meaning using the following prompt:
Determine if a ‘target’ word is the same in meaning(e.g., football & soccer or soccer & football)
to at least one of the ‘answer’ words, or one is a subset to another(e.g., fruit & apple or apple &
fruit). If so, the ‘result’ for ‘target’ word is ‘O’. However, if the two simply falls into the same
level of hierarchy, the ‘result’ is ‘X’ (banana & apple, rose & carnation).
Note that the ‘answer’ list is from ‘answer_country,’ and the ‘target’ word is from ‘target_country,’ as written by a person.
Write down your reasoning first. Do not write any other JSON formatted object in your answer
except for the result JSON object, formatted as {“result”:“O”} or {“result”:“X”}.
Dummy Options Generation. In cases where a question has fewer than four options during the
option generation process, we ask GPT-4 to produce dummy options using the following prompt:
Provide {3 − n} dummy option(s) that makes sense to be the answer(s) of the given “question”,
and has to exist in real-life (non-fiction), but is totally different from the given “answers” without
any explanation. Make sure that the options are different from each other, and cannot be an
answer from any country. Provide as JSON format: {“dummy_options”:[]}
C.3.3

Prompt for Multiple Choice Evaluation

We use the following prompt to evaluate the LLMs’ performance in multiple-choice format:
{QUESTION} Without any explanation, choose only one from the given alphabet choices(e.g.,
A, B, C). Provide as JSON format: {“answer_choice”:“”}
A. {CHOICE 1}
B. {CHOICE 2}
C. {CHOICE 3}
D. {CHOICE 4}
Answer:

D

Detailed LLM Performance Analysis

D.1

LLM Evaluation Results

Figure 13 shows the performance of models presented in 3a in SAQ when asked in English. Table 10
and Table 11 show the performance of all LLMs experimented on SAQ for all countries/regions on
the local language and English, respectively.
Table 12 shows the performance of all LLMs on MCQ for all countries/regions.

35

80

Scores

60
40
20
0

US

GB

CN

ID ES GR MX
GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus

KR AZ IR
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Command R+

DZ

AS JB KP
Qwen1.5-72B
HyperCLOVA-X

ET

NG

Figure 13: LLMs’ performance on short answer questions for each country/region in English. Models
constructed from a Western country are shown in shades of blue, whereas those built from a nonWestern country are shown in shades of red.
Table 10: Performance of all LLMs on short answer questions for each country/region in local
language.

GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus
Claude-3-Sonnet
Llama-3.1-70B
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Command R+
Claude-3-Haiku
GPT-3.5
PaLM2
Qwen1.5-72B
SeaLLM
HyperCLOVA X
Qwen1.5-32B
Command R
Aya-23
Qwen1.5-14B
Aya-101

GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus
Claude-3-Sonnet
Llama-3.1-70B
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Command R+
Claude-3-Haiku
GPT-3.5
PaLM2
Qwen1.5-72B
SeaLLM
HyperCLOVA X
Qwen1.5-32B
Command R
Aya-23
Qwen1.5-14B
Aya-101

US
en

GB
en

ES
es

MX
es

ID
id

CN
zh

KR
ko

DZ
ar

83.19
83.84
81.34
84.92
80.48
80.48
80.48
81.45
80.37
83.95
80.80
81.45
82.43
77.87
77.33
78.74
53.36

82.75
78.79
81.65
81.76
78.57
78.35
77.91
81.87
77.36
79.34
80.11
79.34
79.67
77.58
72.09
76.59
48.02

79.00
78.78
72.60
75.37
74.95
73.67
71.22
74.63
72.92
70.04
67.80
69.08
59.70
68.55
69.62
56.82
45.84

77.45
75.57
72.44
74.74
72.55
70.77
72.03
71.92
71.82
70.15
69.52
72.13
60.65
66.81
66.81
63.26
46.03

77.50
78.02
75.73
78.75
72.71
72.19
70.73
73.12
75.31
65.31
63.75
65.52
58.44
63.02
69.58
54.17
41.88

77.32
76.90
66.77
67.72
70.36
64.87
62.55
68.78
70.57
78.27
64.77
58.44
79.11
60.76
62.03
76.79
32.17

80.95
78.95
66.32
65.26
65.26
75.05
66.63
65.16
63.89
60.53
52.95
79.05
52.74
60.84
66.84
52.21
32.84

67.62
65.68
61.33
55.72
62.01
62.13
57.32
58.70
63.62
54.81
49.54
29.98
41.53
57.78
55.38
39.82
33.64

GR
el

IR
fa

KP
ko

AZ
az

JB
su

AS
as

NG
ha

ET
am

70.43
69.24
63.48
53.59
64.78
59.89
63.37
57.17
67.39
32.93
41.96
35.54
35.33
54.78
58.15
20.54
27.72

73.03
77.85
67.32
73.03
38.82
67.11
59.98
55.48
27.63
39.25
48.79
30.48
44.08
59.98
59.32
28.51
34.87

49.32
55.41
45.05
48.2
43.47
49.55
41.67
40.09
41.67
38.96
39.64
52.03
33.22
40.54
43.24
33.78
23.09

62.05
69.62
59.28
59.49
44.24
41.15
54.58
44.35
29.42
36.89
39.02
27.72
35.71
9.70
27.40
34.01
35.82

55.79
56.55
45.09
46.07
44.87
31.22
43.01
32.31
44.76
32.42
28.38
40.39
26.31
29.04
25.44
22.60
27.51

49.06
52.41
38.89
17.4
27.99
25.89
34.17
6.92
18.03
18.45
15.72
5.77
22.22
13.52
8.49
17.82
4.40

45.93
46.37
27.14
33.52
35.82
16.26
24.07
19.34
19.78
9.67
22.64
10.22
11.21
11.65
5.16
9.12
24.51

25.85
35.38
26.59
17.58
18.86
5.51
21.82
3.71
9.00
8.90
5.40
1.48
4.87
3.18
3.07
3.28
17.80

36

Table 11: Performance of all LLMs on short answer questions for each country/region in English.
CN

ID

ES

GR

MX

KR

AZ

GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus
Claude-3-Sonnet
Llama-3.1-70B
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Command R+
Claude-3-Haiku
GPT-3.5
PaLM2
Qwen1.5-72B
SeaLLM
HyperCLOVA X
Qwen1.5-32B
Command R
Aya-23
Qwen1.5-14B
Aya-101

70.89
66.98
66.88
63.71
66.46
64.98
60.44
64.66
66.14
66.88
65.61
62.76
69.30
61.50
56.65
64.66
34.28

70.00
62.81
66.67
61.98
59.27
59.58
59.38
63.23
62.19
63.54
62.81
63.65
58.75
57.40
53.33
55.73
38.65

67.91
61.30
60.45
59.38
59.70
59.06
53.62
62.26
60.45
63.33
62.58
67.06
61.73
58.64
54.90
55.12
35.71

68.70
61.09
60.98
61.85
60.54
58.59
56.52
61.85
60.98
61.96
59.46
60.33
58.59
56.20
54.02
52.83
38.04

63.15
58.35
57.93
59.71
56.47
61.06
55.74
61.48
58.14
61.48
60.44
63.05
60.96
57.41
51.98
60.44
38.52

69.68
64.42
63.47
62.11
59.68
59.89
59.89
60.00
60.00
56.53
56.95
62.74
56.74
56.11
49.05
54.53
30.74

64.61
60.66
61.30
59.49
57.46
56.50
56.29
59.59
57.68
59.06
58.42
56.61
54.69
51.39
48.72
51.92
31.88

IR

DZ

AS

JB

KP

ET

NG

GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus
Claude-3-Sonnet
Llama-3.1-70B
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Command R+
Claude-3-Haiku
GPT-3.5
PaLM2
Qwen1.5-72B
SeaLLM
HyperCLOVA X
Qwen1.5-32B
Command R
Aya-23
Qwen1.5-14B
Aya-101

65.46
61.29
57.35
61.07
55.92
54.28
53.18
56.36
55.92
56.91
60.20
56.91
54.06
50.99
50.77
52.96
28.95

64.76
57.78
54.92
56.52
53.78
56.86
52.29
57.67
56.29
57.55
52.97
55.15
49.89
55.26
47.83
48.51
30.89

54.09
48.74
50.94
51.26
44.55
48.43
45.70
48.43
47.38
49.79
51.78
51.68
47.69
45.70
44.34
45.39
34.70

55.68
50.76
50.11
49.89
49.89
46.40
46.18
49.56
48.47
47.60
48.69
50.76
44.65
42.03
42.90
40.94
28.49

46.62
42.00
41.10
45.83
42.68
43.58
37.84
44.48
43.36
41.89
41.89
44.03
39.41
41.67
36.26
33.00
24.32

45.97
40.78
42.06
44.6
40.15
40.78
35.49
40.04
38.03
43.75
42.90
45.34
41.31
38.67
34.11
39.72
26.38

37.69
34.95
35.71
36.37
32.42
33.52
34.40
38.46
33.08
38.90
43.08
40.22
39.01
35.05
29.78
39.89
23.41

37

Table 12: Performance of all LLMs on multiple-choice questions for each country/region in English.
GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus
Qwen1.5-72B
Qwen1.5-32B
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Claude-3-Sonnet
Command R+
PaLM2
GPT-3.5
Claude-3-Haiku
SeaLLM
Aya-23
Qwen1.5-14B
Command R
HyperCLOVA X
Aya-101

GPT-4
Claude-3-Opus
Qwen1.5-72B
Qwen1.5-32B
Gemini-1.0-Pro
Claude-3-Sonnet
Command R+
PaLM2
GPT-3.5
Claude-3-Haiku
SeaLLM
Aya-23
Qwen1.5-14B
Command R
HyperCLOVA X
Aya-101

GB

US

CN

ES

MX

DZ

GR

KR

94.17
95.74
91.80
91.94
87.87
83.98
85.16
89.38
86.87
87.41
82.66
82.45
82.96
79.75
79.80
68.75

93.34
93.18
92.29
89.79
89.18
86.18
83.03
86.75
88.83
81.75
83.17
79.83
81.36
73.44
79.78
64.86

93.70
93.05
88.54
89.98
86.97
86.54
79.46
83.18
80.30
79.79
80.08
79.47
79.78
76.57
74.85
61.09

92.04
91.52
85.43
84.45
82.53
81.12
80.18
79.10
82.37
79.34
76.41
76.24
75.47
73.80
71.34
61.68

87.98
89.19
81.14
79.26
80.68
82.75
77.23
77.24
78.74
73.22
71.78
72.17
75.24
70.18
69.14
60.16

89.28
85.98
79.42
76.09
79.09
78.02
76.00
79.68
76.64
78.47
72.68
72.36
73.96
72.66
67.91
57.96

86.73
84.75
80.93
80.40
78.92
77.30
78.39
76.96
75.54
76.24
74.29
70.90
68.89
69.99
68.67
56.60

88.10
86.83
76.94
72.31
80.58
81.79
73.06
73.02
71.10
75.21
74.71
71.49
71.10
70.05
71.15
56.46

JB

IR

ID

AZ

KP

NG

AS

ET

87.90
85.41
78.62
74.75
80.32
77.53
78.10
78.37
74.93
74.39
65.14
71.82
67.43
68.96
68.73
53.59

86.49
87.39
78.14
76.54
75.13
77.69
77.12
72.94
72.78
72.56
70.84
70.56
69.96
70.26
62.84
55.17

87.81
81.36
78.94
74.33
73.63
76.31
79.15
73.69
72.03
71.26
72.24
72.52
66.33
70.21
69.64
55.19

86.58
85.81
75.67
72.95
77.22
73.54
72.56
73.72
74.13
69.91
71.15
67.51
67.31
62.32
68.78
58.19

78.59
74.93
75.95
72.71
67.94
71.33
64.92
64.10
63.34
67.22
60.93
62.98
66.55
61.65
62.78
54.92

76.40
77.32
67.82
71.72
65.04
66.26
70.65
66.46
71.73
68.96
67.41
63.59
65.05
60.76
57.60
43.88

71.79
74.99
64.42
64.04
66.33
68.40
61.94
66.75
61.54
63.93
58.99
55.42
56.14
55.66
60.82
45.08

66.52
64.78
61.63
61.00
56.99
55.20
64.69
57.53
64.22
58.28
58.83
54.32
53.79
55.24
46.04
45.49

38

0.8
Scores

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

US GB CN ES ID MX KR GR DZ IR AZ JB KP AS NG ET
Food
Family
Holidays
Sport
Education
Work-life

Figure 14: Average performance on all LLMs across all countries on each question category.

Work-life
Sport
Holidays
Food
Family
Education
0.44

0.46

0.48

0.50

0.52

0.54

0.56

0.58

0.60

Figure 15: Tukey-HSD test on the LLM performances on each question category with 95% confidence
interval.
D.2

LLM Performance by Question Category

Figure 14 illustrates the average performance of all LLMs for each category per country. This
indicates that LLMs generally perform better in high-resource languages and countries. However,
there are discrepancies in performance across different categories. LLMs do better on work-life or
education-related questions but struggle with food and holidays/celebrations/leisure-related questions.
This could be because the latter topics are more subjective. Figure 15 displays the results of the
Tukey-HSD test on LLM performances for each topic, confirming that the performance difference
between these two groups is statistically significant.
D.3
D.3.1

Human Evaluation
Human Evaluation Schema

The human evaluation is conducted on the following categories, which were decided based on the
pilot annotations by the authors.
Applicability. We ask annotators to evaluate whether the LLM’s response is applicable to the general
population of their country/region. Since we take annotations from only 5 people per question, a
correct answer from the annotator may not necessarily represent the whole culture and vice versa.
The applicability of the response is evaluated on three categories: 1) Applicable, 2) Conditionally
Applicable, and 3) Incorrect. A response is annotated as applicable if all the answers provided by
the model are valid for the general population of the country/region. When the response contains an
answer that makes sense in some contexts but not necessarily to most people from the country/region,
39

Table 13: Summary of the human evaluation results across all countries. Scores are calculated by
giving a weight of 1 for applicable, 0.5 for conditionally applicable, and 0 for incorrect responses.
The values are presented as percentages, calculated by the number of responses that satisfy the criteria
divided by the total number of responses. The country with the highest percentage is marked in bold,
and the second highest is underlined.
Country/Region

Score

Unnatural
Language

Stereotypical

Partially
Correct

Refusal

Nonsensical

Different
Country’s View

US
GB
ES
CN
ID
MX
KR
DZ
GR
IR
KP
AZ
JB
AS
NG
ET

66.67
82.50
39.17
63.33
60.00
68.75
50.42
47.50
56.25
56.67
38.33
42.50
44.58
45.83
36.25
27.92

3.33
0.83
0.00
0.00
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.00
0.83
0.00
18.33
10.00
6.67
5.00
7.50
1.67

0.83
0.83
1.67
3.33
13.33
5.83
7.50
14.17
7.50
13.33
12.50
13.33
21.67
19.17
2.50
48.33

0.00
0.00
5.00
7.50
2.50
4.17
3.33
8.33
0.83
10.83
1.67
0.83
5.00
10.00
22.50
15.83

4.17
0.00
0.00
7.50
1.67
0.83
8.33
2.50
8.33
2.50
16.67
17.50
3.33
6.67
0.83
8.33

5.83
6.67
10.00
3.33
18.33
3.33
5.00
7.50
15.00
10.00
6.67
10.83
38.33
20.83
18.33
24.17

2.50
5.00
11.67
1.67
4.17
6.67
8.33
6.67
8.33
0.00
12.50
13.33
1.67
1.67
7.50
4.17

it is annotated as conditionally applicable. Finally, if at least one answer is completely inapplicable to
the country/region, the response is annotated as incorrect.
Unnatural Language. The response from the model is annotated as unnatural if it is phrased in
a way that a native speaker would not typically use. This includes instances where words sound
like direct translations from English, phrases that sound unnecessarily formal, or when a different
language is used to answer.
Stereotypical. This includes responses containing stereotypical answers about a target country/region. For example, providing the most common traditional food in the country/region as an
answer to a completely unrelated question would be considered a stereotypical response.
Partially correct. The response is annotated as partially correct when the model’s response
contains multiple answers and at least one is completely inapplicable to the general population of the
country/region.
Refusal. This category indicates where the model declines to provide an answer despite the
annotators having determined that a valid answer exists.
Nonsensical. Nonsensical answers include hallucinations from the model or are completely incorrect
by not answering the question properly (e.g., answering “soccer” for a question about a sport played
without a ball).
Different country’s view. A response is annotated under this category if the model includes answers
from the viewpoint of a different country/region. For instance, it includes answers from neighboring
countries or countries sharing a similar yet different culture.
D.3.2

Human Evaluation Result

The summary of the human evaluation result by each error category is shown in Table 13. Detailed
analysis is included in the main text.
We also present a more detailed human analysis of the responses from GPT-4 for selected countries/regions in this section, focusing primarily on under-represented cultures. All responses from
the model were generated in respective local languages, but we present them here in English for the
readers’ convenience.
Algeria (Arabic). Stereotypical responses from the model were predominantly observed in foodrelated questions. Nearly all such responses included couscous, a traditional North African dish, even
40

when irrelevant to the question. For example, the model suggested couscous and baklava as common
picnic foods in Algeria, which is both inaccurate and somehow stereotypical.
Hallucinations were frequently encountered in responses to questions about celebrations or sports not
commonly observed in Algeria. For instance, when asked about Halloween, the model referenced an
unrelated old tradition and included the name of an equally unrelated sweet in Latin script.
Another issue with the model’s responses was the tendency to provide answers applicable to other
Arabic-speaking countries, particularly Middle Eastern ones. This often led to culturally inaccurate
or inappropriate responses for the Algerian context. For instance, when asked about the least favorite
vegetable, the model mentioned bamiya/bamieh, the Middle Eastern name for okra. In Algeria, okra
is called differently (mloukhiya) and is not commonly consumed nationwide. A similar misalignment
with the Middle Eastern view was found in responses about local café brands and popular YouTube
channels.
Assam (Assamese). The responses of the model often pointed towards Bihu, a cultural celebration
of the Assamese people, even though it did not fit the context. It answered many questions with
references to Bihu or Bihu-related activities. For instance, the model answered many food-related
questions with Pitha, a traditional food item only served on special occasions like Bihu. The model
also hallucinated by naming the most popular sports tournament in Assam as the Bihu Tournament,
despite no such tournament existing in Assam.
Azerbaijan (Azerbaijani). The model often gave stereotypical answers related to traditional
Azerbaijani dishes, irrespective of context. For example, it offered traditional foods as answers like
Qutab and Kebab even for settings like amusement parks or fast food preferences, which are not the
most typical or relevant choices in those contexts.
Additionally, the model often provided answers broadly applicable to people from post-Soviet or
Eastern European regions rather than offering responses that uniquely represent Azerbaijan. Though
these responses are not necessarily incorrect, they can be interpreted as lacking specificity. For
instance, the model answered that the most famous leisure activity among retired men in Azerbaijan
is chess, which is a viable option but is still more famous in Russia and Türkiye.
China (Chinese). The responses from the model were generally acceptable, with a few cases
either stereotypical or biased toward Western culture. For instance, the model answered that the
most famous sport played without a ball in China is table tennis, which is both stereotypical and
nonsensical. It also answered that the most popular sports-related TV program in China is Sports
Scene, a Chinese TV program broadcasted in English.
At certain times, the model demonstrated impressive capabilities, indicating its high cultural understanding of China. For instance, when answering questions related to Ramadan, the model showed a
good understanding of the minor population in China. Though Ramadan is generally not observed in
most parts of China, it is often observed in certain regions, particularly in the Ningxia province. The
text below is the response from GPT-4 on the question, ‘What do people from China eat in Ramadan?’
(translated in English).
Ramadan is the Islamic fasting month, mainly observed by Muslims. Chinese Muslims eat
prepared food before sunrise (called “Suhur”) and break their fast (called “Iftar”) after sunset
during Ramadan. They usually eat light, nutritious food, including fruits, vegetables, meat,
beans, dairy products, and grains. Non-Muslim Chinese people do not eat any different food
during Ramadan than usual.
Ethiopia (Amharic). Nonsensical answers were significantly prevalent, where the model often
repeated the question itself as an answer. There were even answers containing typographic errors.
Additionally, there were several cases where the model gave long texts of repeated words and phrases.
Such incidents indicate the model’s limited ability to understand and use Amharic.
The model often gave answers commonly associated with Ethiopia but did not necessarily answer the
question correctly. For instance, the model gave Injera as the answer for most of the food-related
questions, possibly because ‘Injera’ is a well-known food item in Ethiopia. These answers were often
regarded as stereotypical or even nonsensical.
Greece (Greek). Stereotypical answers were mostly from food-related questions, where the model
gave a typical Greek dish as an answer to an irrelevant question. For instance, the model answered
41

that the most popular flavor of crisps/chips is feta cheese, which is not a very popular choice among
people.
There were also several instances where the model displayed biases towards the English culture. For
example, it incorrectly stated that people in Greece eat pumpkin pie during Halloween, even though
Halloween is not widely celebrated in Greece. It also answered that one of the most popular sports
among elderly people is golf, a sport that is not as popular as in Greece compared to other countries
around the Mediterranean.
Indonesia (Indonesian). Most of the stereotypical answers came from the food category questions.
The most popular choice from the model was nasi goreng (fried rice), where the model even gave that
as an answer to a question about the most popular wheat-based food item. Hallucinations were also
common for questions requiring a person’s name, where the model provided the name of a completely
unrelated person.
Though it was very rare, there were instances where the answers could be considered offensive,
especially for questions related to religion. For example, the model incorrectly identified Ketupat, a
dish commonly served during Muslim festivals in Indonesia, as the most common food served during
Easter. Such answers may inadequately represent the Christian population in Indonesia.
An interesting example related to ‘different country’s view’ came from the following question: ‘What
is installed in front of the house when a family member dies in your country?’. The model’s answer
was flying the flag at half mast, a practice common in other countries during national mourning.
However, this practice is not applicable when a family member dies in Indonesia. In Indonesia,
people usually put up a yellow flag to indicate that someone has died in that area. There were many
other instances where the model answered from the perspective of a different country. For example,
it provided Independence Day as an answer to a question about the day of the year dedicated to
fireworks in Indonesia. In Indonesia, people do not celebrate Independence Day by using fireworks.
Iran (Persian). Hallucinations were very common when answering questions that required a
person’s name. For instance, it incorrectly identified the Mayor of Tehran as the most famous boxer,
provided the coach’s name instead of the athlete’s, and even provided non-existent names.
In many cases, the model refused to answer because the question was considered illegal according to
local laws. For instance, when asked about the most common alcoholic drink, the model responded
that these drinks are illegal in Iran and, therefore, it could not provide an answer.
The model almost always provided answers to questions about a specific date based on the Gregorian
calendar, even though people in Iran use the Solar Hijri calendar. While the answers were mostly
correct when converted, the fact that both the questions and answers were in Persian suggests that the
responses lacked cultural sensitivity.
North Korea (Korean). Offensive responses were heavily prevalent in North Korea, where the
model answered Kim Jong Un, the current supreme leader of North Korea, for completely unrelated
questions, such as the most popular fruit in North Korea or the type of shoes students wear at school.
Moreover, the responses from the model were biased towards the people from Pyongyang, the capital
of North Korea. This phenomenon may stem from insufficient information about people from other
areas in North Korea.
Another interesting finding was that the responses from the model were often phrased in the words
used exclusively in South Korea. For instance, the answer given by the model for many food-related
questions was naengmyeon (냉면), despite the fact that it is spelled differently in North Korea
(raengmyon (랭면)).
South Korea (Korean). Most incorrect responses that reflected the viewpoint of the other country
were mainly due to the different age system used in South Korea. For instance, the model answered
19 for the question about the average age at which people go to university, whereas the most plausible
answer would be ‘20’ according to the South Korean age system. Such responses are surprising,
as we have explicitly prompted the model to provide the answer using South Korea’s traditional
age-counting custom.
One interesting case was the question about the most famous family in South Korea. The model
answered Admiral Yi Sun-sin’s family, referencing a national hero who is very famous among people

42

from South Korea, but not his family. Similarly, there were several instances where the model
hallucinated by giving inaccurate answers tied to South Korea’s traditional culture or history.
West Java (Sundanese). Unlike prior expectations that the model would wrongly provide answers
applicable to people from all parts of Indonesia, as West Java is a specific region within the Indonesian
country, the model tended to offer specific answers related to West Java. However, the problem
was that these answers did not include a full understanding of the context. For instance, the model
answered Dodol Garut, a traditional dessert from West Java, for a question asking about the food
associated with Valentine’s Day. Such a response is very stereotypical, considering that people in
West Java also exchange chocolate for Valentine’s Day, similar to other countries.
There were also errors in the language used by the model, where it answered in Indonesian instead of
Sundanese.

43

