GOVERNING WITH
ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE: ARE
GOVERNMENTS
READY?
OECD ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE PAPERS
June 2024 No. 20

Restricted Use - À usage restreint

|1
This report was written by Barbara-Chiara Ubaldi, Deputy Head of Division and Head of the Digital
Government Unit, and Ricardo Zapata, Policy Analyst, under the supervision of Carlos Santiso, Head of
the OECD Innovative, Digital and Open Government (INDIGO) Division, Public Governance Directorate.
Elsa Pilichowski, Director for Public Governance, and Gillian Dorner, Deputy Director for Public
Governance, advised on the strategic approach and scope.
An initial draft of this report was enriched by the contributions and comments of the OECD Public
Governance Committee in October 2023, as well as from the OECD Working Party of Senior Digital
Government Officials (E-Leaders) in December 2023. The authors are thankful for the valuable comments
from Miguel Amaral, Alana Baker, Charles Baubion, Erika Bozzay, Emma Cantera, Marco Daglio, Daniel
Gerson, Pinar Guven, Andras Hlacs, Kenza Khachani, Eduardo Mangada Real de Usúa, Arturo Rivera,
Alex Seeman, and the Trade Union Advisory Committee to the OECD. Further, the report was enhanced
by the contributions from Karine Perset and Luis Aranda, among others, from the OECD Science,
Technology and Innovation Directorate. Andrea Uhrhammer provided editorial support.
The paper was approved and declassified for publication by the OECD Public Governance Committee
(PGC) on 11 June 2024 and prepared for publication by the OECD Secretariat.
This document, as well as any data and map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or
sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name
of any territory, city or area.
© OECD 2024
Cover image: © Kjpargeter/Shutterstock.com.
The use of this work, whether digital or print, is governed by the Terms and Conditions to be found at
http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

2|

Governing with Artificial
Intelligence: Are governments
ready?

OECD countries are increasingly investing in better understanding the
potential value of using AI to improve public governance. The use of AI by
the public sector can increase productivity, responsiveness of public
services, and strengthen the accountability of governments. However,
governments must also mitigate potential risks, building an enabling
environment for trustworthy AI. This policy paper outlines the key trends
and policy challenges in the development, use, and deployment of AI in and
by the public sector. First, it discusses the potential benefits and specific
risks associated with AI use in the public sector. Second, it looks at how AI
in the public sector can be used to improve productivity, responsiveness,
and accountability. Third, it provides an overview of the key policy issues
and presents examples of how countries are addressing them across the
OECD.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

|3

Executive Summary

There is growing awareness that, if used strategically and responsibly, artificial intelligence (AI), including
generative AI, has the potential to transform how governments function, design policies, and provide
services. Governments have multiple roles in relation to AI, as enablers, funders, regulators, but also as
users and in some cases as developers. While the global debate on AI has tended to focus on
governments’ role as regulators in shaping and responding to the application of AI, less attention has been
paid to their responsibilities as users of AI. As governments seize the opportunities of AI for better
governance and deploy solutions in a broad range of policy areas, they recognise the need to govern AI
in the public sector to prevent misuse and mitigate risks.
In this context, OECD countries are increasingly investing in better understanding AI systems and using
the opportunities they provide to transform the machinery of government. The responsible use of AI can
improve the functioning of government administrations in several ways.
•

First, the use of AI in the public sector can help governments increase productivity with more
efficient internal operations and more effective public policies.

•

Second, AI can help make the design and delivery of public policies and services more inclusive
and responsive to the evolving needs of citizens and specific communities.

•

Third, AI can strengthen the accountability of governments by enhancing their capacity for
oversight and supporting independent oversight institutions.

This potential has by no means been fully explored and exploited. More evidence is needed on use cases
to better understand how to successfully develop and deploy AI initiatives, learning from successes and
failures. Despite the potential benefits of AI, there are also growing concerns about the risks of a
fragmented and ungoverned deployment of AI in the public sector. Such risks include the amplification of
bias, the lack of transparency in system design, and breaches in data privacy and security – all of which
could lead to unfair and discriminatory outcomes with profound societal implications. The public sector has
a special responsibility to deploy AI in a way that minimises harm and prioritises the well-being of
individuals and communities, especially when deploying AI in sensitive policy domains such as law
enforcement, immigration control, welfare benefits, and fraud prevention.
Governments are gradually working to establish an environment throughout the entire policy cycle to
enable the safe, secure and trustworthy development, deployment and use of AI. These efforts
comprehend defining strategic objectives, exploring new institutional arrangements, developing policy
instruments (such as standards, codes, guidelines) and new regulatory frameworks, and attract the
capacities needed to use AI effectively and efficiently in the public sector. Additionally, governments are
increasingly prioritising monitoring implementation and impact t to foster public trust and ensure long-term
sustainability of current initiatives.
The OECD is supporting governments in their endeavour to pursue a safe, secure, and trustworthy use of
AI in the public sector. The focus of the work is to guide governments in framing the relevant questions
and identifying the most adequate enablers and guardrails that government need to consider when

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

4|
choosing to apply AI to drive productivity, responsiveness, and accountability, as desired impacts.
Fostering a common language will also help collecting evidence, fostering peer-learning and enhancing
co-operation that will help governments be prepared to address common challenges.
This paper is part of a broader effort to understand the responsible use of AI in the public sector in a range
of key government functions. As such, it seeks to ultimately contribute to the global need for further
knowledge sharing, exchange of good practices, and structured policy dialogue to understand the
implications and steer a responsible use of AI in the public sector. More and better indicators and evidence
of the implementation and impact of AI on governments will help ensure it is used for optimal purposes;
and multistakeholder engagement across policy sectors and beyond national borders will be needed to
collectively explore policy options as new challenges and opportunities emerge.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

|5

1 Potential benefits and risks of

artificial intelligence in the public
sector

In addition to their role as regulators, governments are also users and, in some cases, developers of AI
systems and applications 1 – progressively integrating them into their array of tools to deliver better policy
outcomes (Ubaldi et al., 2019[1]; Farrell et al., 2023[2]; González, Ortiz and Sánchez Ávalos, 2020[3]). 2 The
expectation is that the use of AI can help governments improve in the following areas:
•

Productivity in policymaking and service delivery, by:
-

Improving the effectiveness of policymaking, by using large amounts of data to gain more
granular insights into user needs and identify patterns. This, in turn, would allow government
to formulate more targeted policies and deliver better outcomes, by better targeting social
expenditures, public investments and government services. For example, the municipality of
Nijmegen in the Netherlands uses AI to count people in various locations of the city centre to
monitor traffic and economic activity. The system outputs inform the design of more effective
policies in areas such as road safety and entrepreneurial support. 3

-

Increasing the efficiency of internal operations, by automating complex but repetitive
administrative processes and procedures to support and facilitate the productive work of public
officials, free up the time of skilled civil servants and ensure the reliability of the continuous
delivery of public services. For example, the Queensland Government in Australia is using
machine learning and computer vision to automatically map and classify land use features in
satellite imagery, reducing the costs of mapping land use and improving the response to
biosecurity and natural disaster events.

•

Responsiveness, by improving governments’ ability to anticipate societal trends and user needs
to deliver proactive, personalised, and human-centred public services. For example, during the
COVID-19 pandemic in Norway, the Labour and Welfare Administration used a conversational AI
called Frida to help citizens access social benefits 24/7, resolving 80% of enquiries without
requiring the intervention of a civil servant. 4 This not only improved the quality of interactions by
providing more timely and targeted assistance, which was crucial under the extreme
circumstances, but also improved the civil servants’ jobs quality by handling requests during nonstandard hours and regular inquiries.

•

Accountability, by using data analytics and machine learning techniques to detect fraud and risks
to public sector integrity by identifying irregularities or suspicious patterns and raising red flags. For
instance, AI is increasingly being applied to public procurement, public spending, and the provision
of public grants, social benefits, and subsidies programmes. For example, Transport Canada has
piloted the use of a risk-assessment algorithm to assess and identify potentially high-risk cargo
before it is loaded onto inbound aircraft. 5

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

6|
At the same time, it is important to develop, deploy, and use AI in a safe, secure and trustworthy way in
the public interest. Critical areas of concern include upholding human and civil rights, protecting personal
privacy, securing algorithmic transparency, ensuring accountability, promoting “explainability”, and
avoiding potential unfair and biased policy outcomes, among others. Some significant AI failures in the
public sector have highlighted the need for governments to assess, test, and monitor AI’s impacts on the
public. It is important to identify and manage risks for citizens; consider how AI systems may affect men,
women or marginalized communities differently; ensure that the benefits of AI are distributed equitably;
and mitigate potential harm.
In this context, governments are increasing their efforts to develop or procure trustworthy AI in line with
the Principles of the OECD AI Recommendation (Box 1), that is, AI systems that respect human rights and
privacy; are fair, transparent, explainable, robust, secure and safe; and where the actors involved in their
development and use remain accountable (OECD, 2021[4]). Governments are progressively taking steps
to raise awareness and build capacity amongst civil servants, rethink governance mechanisms, upgrade
regulatory frameworks, and strengthen central oversight and data governance. Some governments have
even implemented outright bans of some types of AI applications in some jurisdictions (e.g., the use of
facial recognition in San Francisco, along with various other municipalities in the United States 6, and more
recently, with the EU AI Act, as described in Box ). Others have opted to provide guidance in the form of
ethical frameworks and guidelines, standards, and codes of conduct (OECD, 2021[5]). Sections 2 and 3
below further discuss the expected benefits and specific policy actions undertaken by countries to establish
an enabling environment for safe, secure and trustworthy use of AI in the public sector.
Globally, the growing number of international standards highlight an emerging consensus for ensuring the
responsible development and use of AI. Examples include the 2019 OECD AI Principles updated in 2024
(see Box 1), the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence adopted in 2021 by the UNESCO 7,
the AI principles and “International Code of Conduct for Organizations Developing Advanced AI Systems”
developed by the G7 as part of the Hiroshima AI Process 8, the EU AI Act 9, the Council of Europe’s
Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence 10, and the 2024 UN Resolution on the promotion of safe,
secure and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems for sustainable development. 11
However, these initiatives tend to indirectly address the public sector, underscoring the need for more
specific guidance. More recently, the G7 “Ministerial Declaration on Industry, Technology, and Digital” of
March 2024 recognised the need to ensure that public sectors are equipped to deal with AI systems. 12 In
Ibero-American countries, a more targeted standard has been developed through the regional Charter on
Artificial Intelligence in Public Administration (Box 2). To address the need for more targeted international
guidance on AI for the public sector, Section 4 presents a preliminary framework for the implementation of
trustworthy AI.

Box 1. OECD AI Principles
The OECD Principles on Artificial Intelligence support AI that is innovative and trustworthy, and which
respects human rights and democratic values. OECD Member countries adopted the Principles in May
2019 as part of the OECD Council Recommendation on Artificial Intelligence and updated them in May
2024 [OECD/LEGAL/0449]. They complement existing OECD standards in areas such as privacy,
digital security risk management and responsible business conduct. The Recommendation
identifies five values-based principles for the responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI and
provides five recommendations to governments.
Values-based principles
• Inclusive growth, sustainable development and wellbeing

Recommendations to governments
• Investing in AI R&D
• Fostering an inclusive AI-enabling ecosystem

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

|7
• Human rights and democratic values, including fairness
an privacy
• Transparency and explainability
• Robustness, security and safety
• Accountability

• Shaping an enabling governance and policy environment
for AI
• Building human capacity and preparing for labour market
transition
• International co-operation for trustworthy AI

Source: https://oecd.ai and (OECD/CAF, 2022[6]).

Box 2. Ibero-American Charter on Artificial Intelligence in the Public Administration
The Charter was issued by the Latin American Centre for Development Administration (CLAD), an
intergovernmental organization comprised of 24 Latin American countries, Spain, and Portugal. It was
formulated to foster a common framework for the development and application of AI within public
administrations in the Ibero-American region. The Charter sets forth guiding principles and outlines key
dimensions and directions for the holistic and systematic adoption and use of AI across all state bodies
and institutions.
Source: https://clad.org/declaraciones-consensos/carta-iberoamericana-de-inteligencia-artificial-en-la-administracion-publica/

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

8|

2 Delivering impact by leveraging

artificial intelligence in the public
sector

This section considers how countries are exploring and exploiting the potential of AI in the public sector,
based on the analysis of concrete use cases. To gain a deeper understanding of how the use of AI in the
public sector is expected to produce benefits and help delivering impact, Table 1 presents a preliminary
taxonomy 13 applied to analyse the use cases. This taxonomy outlines the specific tasks performed by AI
systems, in line with the OECD Framework for the Classification of AI Systems (OECD, 2022[7]), . Second,
the taxonomy distinguishes four key functions of the public sector where these tasks can be performed:
•

Efficiency - Improve the internal operations of public administrations (where AI is most commonly
used).

•

Effectiveness – Improve policy making, which is understood as the decision-making process to
plan, implement, and (where relevant) alter public policies and programmes (OECD, 2020[8]).

•

Responsiveness -Improve service delivery, which is understood both in terms of the provision of
public services and their design.

•

Accountability - Enhance oversight and risk detection, both within government agencies in highrisk areas and by external oversight agencies (OECD, 2024[9]).

Finally, the taxonomy looks at the impact of these uses cases for the public sector in terms of
responsiveness, productivity (efficiency and effectiveness) and accountability.

Table 1. Understanding the use of AI in the public sector
Tasks

Function

Impact

• Recognition.

Internal operations

Productivity (efficiency and
effectiveness)

• Event detection.
• Forecasting.
• Personalisation.

• Interaction support.
• Goal-driven optimization.
• Reasoning with knowledge
structures.

• Content generation

Policy making
Responsiveness
Service delivery
Internal and external
oversight

Accountability

Source: authors’ elaboration, using “AI System Tasks” taxonomies from (OECD, 2022[7]).

The taxonomy was employed to analyse selected examples, chosen from a pool of 71 use cases 14 across
31 Member and accession countries. These were collected in 2023 as part of the OECD Survey on Digital
GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

|9
Government 2.0 and the Call for Innovations in Government of the OECD’s Observatory of Public Sector
Innovation (OPSI).

Tasks
In most of the cases reviewed, AI is used to perform specific tasks, such as recognition (i.e., identifying
and categorising data), forecasting (i.e., predicting future outcomes), and interaction support
(e.g., chatbots and virtual assistants). Box 2.1 provides detailed definitions and examples of these tasks.
For instance, in Luxembourg, the Information and Press Service has employed facial recognition
technology to identify public figures (i.e. politicians) within an extensive media library of political photos.
This initiative aims to enhance the metadata associated with the media archive, ultimately improving public
communication: with properly tagged photos, media representatives and journalists can swiftly access
visual materials for their reporting, thereby facilitating more accurate and timely news coverage. Another
example is the use of AI by civitech initiatives deployed by governments for event detection and recognition
tasks. This is the case of CitizenLab in Belgium, which is used by 400+ local governments to enhance
their understanding of and responsiveness to citizens’ feedback. It enables civil servants to better group
and categorize citizen input collected through online platforms, streamlining the processing of thousands
of contributions, and improving the ability to address community needs more effectively. The system allows
to better analyse public consultations across different policy areas (e.g., environment, urban planning, local
government, infrastructure).

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

10 |

Box 2.1. Tasks of AI Systems
The task of an AI system is the most basic job that the AI is programmed to perform. They can be
categorised into seven main types of tasks that most AI systems can do and which can be applied in
the public sector:
Task

What it does

Examples

Recognition

Identifies and categorises data (e.g. image, video, audio and
text) into specific classifications. Output is often one label, e.g.
“this is a cat”.

Image & object detection; facial recognition. Audio,
sound, handwriting and text recognition; gesture
detection.

Event detection

Connects data points to detect patterns as well as outliers or
anomalies.

Fraud and risk detection, flagging human mistakes,
intelligent monitoring.

Forecasting

Uses past and existing behaviours to predict future outcomes,
generally to help make decisions. Contains a clear temporal
dimension.

Assisted search, predicting future values for data,
predicting failure, predicting population behaviour,
identifying and selecting best fit, identifying matches
in data, optimising activities, intelligent navigation.

Personalisation

Develops a profile of an individual and then learns and adapts to
that individual over time. The output is usually a ranking, e.g. a
search engine ranking.

Recommender systems based on search and
browsing (Netflix, Amazon), personalised fitness,
wellness, finance.

Interaction
support

Interprets and creates content to power conversational and other
interactions between machines and humans (e.g. involving voice,
text, images). Can be realtime or not.

Chatbots, voice assistants, sentiments model and
intent analysis, back-office process automation (rulebased routing, moving information between systems)

Goal-driven
optimisation

Gives systems a goal and the ability to find the optimal solution
to a problem, which can be by learning through trial and error. It
assumes a cost function is given.

Game playing, resource/logistics optimisation,
iterative problem-solving, bidding and advertising,
real-time auctions, scenario simulation.

Reasoning with
knowledge
structures

Infers new outcomes that are possible, even if they are not
present in existing data, through modelling and simulation.

Expert systems, legal argumentation, recruitment
systems, diagnosis, planning.

Content
generation

Refers to the autonomous production of text, images, audio, or
video from input data, often leveraging natural language
processing and deep learning techniques.

Writing articles, generating product descriptions,
creating artwork, producing synthetic speech,
composing music, generating deepfake videos.

Source: adapted from (OECD, 2022[7])

Government functions
Internal operations
In most of the use cases reviewed, AI is mainly used to increase efficiency of internal operations in the
public sector. This is consistent with the evidence collected through the 2023 OECD Digital Government
Index, indicating that about 70% of participating countries have used AI to enhance internal operations
(OECD, 2024[10]).
For example, France is currently experimenting with a generative AI 15 tool called “Albert” to streamline the
daily tasks of France advisors on public services. This tool aids in accessing information, related sources,
frequently asked questions, and practical links, enabling advisors to provide customised assistance to the
users they assist 16. The tool is characterised by its free and open-source approach. Furthermore, France
has initiated a pilot project using AI to assist managers in recognising the skills required for assessing
public servants' missions. Canada is using robotic process automation to automate tedious tasks such as
transferring information between systems, streamlining internal operations and increasing efficiencies of
officers’ workflows. These tools are used in multiple federal departments and principally support
interaction. In Sweden, the Companies Registration Office developed an AI model that sorts
GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 11
approximatively 60% of incoming emails 17. The model reads their content, detects specific key phrases,
and forwards it to the right recipient within the Office. In the case that an email does not contain one of the
predefined key phrases, it reviews its entire content and makes an assessment based on employees’
previous behaviours. In Italy, the Corte dei Conti (Court of Auditors) uses a custom-AI model called
GiusBERTo to automatically deidentify and anonymise court decisions without sacrificing any important
information, a process previously done manually. This solution helps to balance the public’s right to access
information with the need to protect the privacy of citizens. The anonymised documents are then subject
to human review to ensure their accuracy and completeness (Datta et al., 2023[11]).
As countries acknowledge the potential that AI can bring to enhance public sector productivity, they are
adapting their internal frameworks to facilitate its systematic use. For instance, the Infrastructure and
Projects Authority (IPA) of the United Kingdom has released a framework to use AI for enhancing
productivity in the delivery of public projects, while also promoting responsible experimentation with AI to
address commonly major challenges in public projects 18. The framework recognises the necessity of
enhancing the enabling environment, including the upskilling of project delivery professionals in AI and
data analytics (see Section 3 below).

Policy making
Many use cases aim to improve effectiveness in policymaking. This is seen particularly in tax administration
(e.g., streamlining tax collection processes and preventing tax fraud), budget management (e.g., analysing
spending and revenue data to develop and manage budget more effectively, and anticipating budget
allocations), public health, welfare benefits, and social services. However, according to the 2023 OECD
Digital Government Index, only 30% of countries have used AI for policymaking, a significantly lower
adoption rate compared to its application for internal operations (OECD, 2024[10]). One example from the
public health sector is the AI convergence system developed by Korea’s Disease Control and Prevention
Agency to address situations of emerging infectious diseases. The system performs forecasting tasks by
analysing medical data, quarantine data, and spatial data to develop policy responses to infectious
diseases.
Although less prominent across the use cases analysed, governments are also using AI to improve
policymaking in other sectoral areas, such as transport, environment, security, urban planning,
employment, justice, infrastructure, education, foreign affairs, among others. For example, in Colombia,
a project developed by the Organisation of Ibero-American States with the National Land Agency combined
AI, satellite imaging, and online monitoring platforms to generate detailed geo-cadastral information within
a 200,000-hectare polygon in a remote rural area, allowing the recognition and registry of nearly 1,900
properties. 19 In France, the Paris-Saclay agglomeration of municipalities is using AI to simulate different
energy management scenarios through a digital twin of their territory, allowing officials to more effectively
evaluate the environmental and financial impacts of projects and improve long-term planning capabilities 20.

Service design and delivery
Governments are also using AI to increase responsiveness in the design and delivery of public services.
Similar to the uptake of AI use for internal operations, 67% of OECD countries are using AI to improve the
design and delivery of public services, according to the 2023 OECD Digital Government Index (OECD,
2024[10]). For example, Finland is using the AuroraAI programme to identify public services that are overly
cumbersome for the user 21. It uses AI to simulate potential service paths and proactively offer citizens
services based on life events (e.g. marriage, beginning university, retirement). This system is being used
across many policy areas and performs mainly tasks for recognition and personalisation 22.
At the sector level, the Austrian Digitalisation and E-Government Directorate of the Federal Ministry of
Finance developed Mona, a conversational chatbot to provide information to entrepreneurs about

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

12 |
business-related services and help them navigate the most relevant web content, increasing service quality
and relieving civil servants from excessive workload. The system improves responsiveness in public
services and performs principally interaction support tasks. In Türkiye, the Ministry of Health integrated an
AI-powered application called "Neyim Var?" 23 (or What's wrong with me?, in English) within "e-Nabız", an
e-health platform offering access to various health services. The AI application provides personalised
guidance to citizens, including healthy nutrition recommendations. Public employment services or labour
agencies are also using AI systems to improve service delivery. For example, the France’s Pôle Emploi,
uses a tool called “Automatic CV Analysis” (Analyse Automatique de CV – AACV) which helps jobseekers
from the moment they create a profile. In Belgium, the Public Employment Service of Flanders' (VDAB)
Competency-Seeker platform helps both jobseekers and employers enrich and refine the skills profiles
they have and are looking for (Broecke, 2023[12]).

Government oversight
A variety of use cases show that AI can help increase transparency and accountability of government
activities, when tested appropriately and used responsively (OECD, 2022[13]). Tax and procurement
agencies, as well as audit institutions have been early adopters of these technologies, in areas ranging
from fraud detection and corruption control to risk management.
For example, Spain’s Comptroller General has used AI to identify high-risk instances of potential fraud in
grant and subsidies programmes (OECD, 2021[14]). In Estonia, the Tax and Customs Board (MTA) has
been testing AI to identify incorrectly submitted VAT refund claims and to identify companies or persons in
need for inspection 24. Such use cases perform mainly event detection tasks. An interesting example of
sectorial oversight is the data science application, SELFIM, built by the French Ministry of Interior, that
automatically detects attempts to defraud the vehicle registration certificate (VRC). Other central oversight
agencies and independent watchdogs have been using AI to better identify suspicious patterns and raise
red flags, in particular with government procurement. In Brazil, for example, the General Controllership of
the Union created the Analyzer of Biddings, Contracts and Notices (Alice) to deliver preventive and timely
action in relation to public procurement. The system automatically collects information on the ongoing
processes on the main public procurement platforms of the Federal Government on a daily basis, assesses
a set of risks and issues, alerts to direct the attention of the auditors and managers involved to situations
that do not conform to the expected standards (Oliveira, Monteiro da Rocha and Scatolino de Rezende,
2022[15]).

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 13

3 Policy issues and actions for a

responsible use of artificial
intelligence in the public sector

Governments are working to establish an environment that enables the safe, secure and trustworthy
development, deployment and use of AI to maximise benefits and address associated challenges. This
section explores the main policy challenges emerging for the public sector and the actions developed by
OECD countries to address them.

Defining strategic objectives
Securing political and public support to scale-up the deployment of AI in the public sector remains a
challenge in most countries. To gain and maintain the support needed, governments are developing
strategies for AI adoption in the public sector. The intent is to steer the coherent development, deployment,
and use of AI across public sector institutions in line with overarching values and objectives. Governments
are also exploring new institutional arrangements or adjusting the mandates of existing institutions, such
as those responsible for digital government, data governance, public sector innovation, government
transparency or oversight, to integrate AI in their mandates and functions. Furthermore, Parliaments are
increasingly turning their attention to the responsible use of AI in and by public sectors and are creating
pressure on governments to provide transparent and strategic steering, e.g. special inquiry commissions
and/or committees have been established in Parliaments in Australia and in the United Kingdom.
Several actions are expected to advance a more coherent and trustworthy development, deployment and
use of AI in and by the public sector. These include:
•

providing a whole-of-government approach through strategic guidance, clear objectives and
oversight to steer the integration and procurement of AI across sectors, ministries, and agencies
in accordance to expected values and guiding principles.

•

embedding participatory mechanisms within institutional arrangements to increase the
engagement of and oversight by citizens and other relevant stakeholders in the design,
development, and deployment of AI in the public sector (Wong et al., 2022[16]).

•

establishing robust data governance for the whole public sector to support access to and sharing
of high-quality government data, often integrating data governance strategies with AI strategies;
acknowledging that trustworthy use of AI relies on high quality data.

•

ensuring the reliability of AI systems used in the public sector. This entails developing or using
the right metrics and tools 25 to systematically scrutinise AI systems and models used in the public
sector to make sure they deliver inclusive and fair results. This includes also having safeguards in
place to prevent or rectify biases (e.g., gender, racial, etc.) and other problematic outputs.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

14 |
•

enhancing accountability in the deployment of AI within the public sector through greater
transparency, explainability, and traceability, for instance through the establishments of algorithmic
accountability standards and open registries of public algorithms 26.

To better respond to these expectations, governments are exploring new institutional arrangements. These
arrangements aim to ensure the necessary steering from the centre of government for a coherent and
accountable deployment and use of AI across the public sector, in line with overarching democratic values
and the pursuit of the public interest. A number Several European countries are expanding the mandates
of existing ministries or agencies, such as Norway’s Ministry of Digitalisation and Public Governance 27 or
Spain’s Secretary of State for Digitalisation and Artificial Intelligence within the Ministry of Digital
Transformation and Public Management. A similar trend is emerging in Latin America. A review on the use
of AI in the public sector indicates that at least half of the countries in the region have identified a specific
government organisation to drive AI efforts (OECD/CAF, 2022[6]).
Additionally, new institutions are emerging, such as the European AI Office 28, the European Artificial
Intelligence Board, the European Centre for Algorithmic Transparency (ECAT) 29 or Spain’s AI Supervision
Agency 30. These institutions are tasked with supervising the implementation and enforcement of
regulations related to AI, in alignment with the new EU AI Act requirements (see Box 4). Complementary
arrangements introducing participatory mechanisms are also being explored, such as the citizen assembly
on AI launched in the EU by the Belgium Presidency 31. However, the mandate of these institutions in
relation to the use of AI in the public sector is not always clearly defined. Other countries are establishing
new roles to ensure leadership and oversight for the use of AI in government, often adopting decentralised
approaches. The United States requires federal agencies to designate Chief AI Officers, responsible to
coordinate the use of AI across their agencies, and to establish AI Governance Boards, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary or equivalent, to coordinate and govern the use of AI across the agency 32.
There are also attempts to leverage existing arrangements to set up new coordination and regulatory
mechanisms. Australia for example created an AI in Government Taskforce under the joint leadership of
the Digital Transformation Agency and the Department of Industry, Science and Resources 33. The
taskforce has been mandated to develop guidelines and a governance approach on how to best enable
the safe, ethical, and responsible use of AI in public service, including to improve risk management, skills
and capability, technical use, and preparedness. In the European Union, some member states have opted
to create a unit in charge of algorithms inside their national Data Protection Authorities to be the AI
regulatory bodies (OECD, 2023[17]).
While many countries have similar efforts underway, more analysis is needed to better understand which
institutional structures and organisational arrangements are more effective in steering, managing, and
overseeing the deployment of AI in a given administrative context. This may imply the establishment of
new institutions or broadening of the scope of the mandate of existing ones to drive the effective
implementation of AI systems, thereby enhancing their accountability and ultimately ensuring long-term
viability. When looking into options the overall institutional context of a country should be considered to
ensure flexibility to reinforce coordination and oversight across policy sectors and levels of government.
In addition to new institutional arrangements, almost all OECD countries are developing or updating their
strategies, agendas or plans for AI that include specific objectives or actions for its use in the public sector
(OECD, 2024[10]). The most common objectives of these policy documents, that are specifically designed
to foster a coherent deployment and use of AI in the public sector, include improving digital public
infrastructure, strengthening data governance, promoting AI adoption, and enhancing AI governance.
Developing cross-border ecosystems and strengthening civil servants’ capabilities are less developed
aspects. When looking at the enablers to help drive progress in AI deployment and greater accountability,
most of the reviewed strategies define specific actions and set goals, while about half of the strategies
establish funding mechanisms, develop monitoring instruments, and define responsible actors. A minority
sets implementation timeframes for specific actions.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 15
However, AI strategies specifically targeted to the public sector are still very limited. Most of the existing
strategies cover a broader scope and actions to catalyse economic development, transform the labour
market, or strengthen AI skills and talents across society. Among those efforts more targeted to the public
sector, in France, the Conseil d’État published in 2022 a report that supports the development of a
dedicated strategy for trustful AI in the public sector to improve public performance and the quality of public
services 34. As a more targeted instrument, the country’s General Directorate of Administration and Civil
Service (DGAFP, by its acronym in French) is currently developing a strategy for the use of AI for human
resources management (HRM) in the public sector 35. The strategy seeks to support experimentation with
AI actions to enhance empowerment and service quality, identify risks related to AI adoption in public HRM,
assess current and future AI skill needs, among others. Outside the OECD, Uruguay’s AI strategy 36 has
been highlighted due to its dedicated focus on the public sector (OECD/CAF, 2022[6]).

Designing policies
Risks associated with the use of AI (see Section 1) and unsuccessful use cases have sparked the
development of dedicated policies, standards, codes, and guidelines, and in some cases new regulatory
frameworks. These initiatives aim to more effectively prevent and address failures or to guide the ethical
and responsible development of AI systems in the public sector. The approaches from countries in driving
good use include soft guardrails, as well as new regulations and legislation. However, enforcement is still
a challenge, either concerning the correct application of these policies or the availability of the necessary
capabilities to drive accountability.
To address these concerns, most countries have set a variety of soft guardrails like ethical frameworks,
standards, guidelines, or transparency tools to steer the responsible deployment of AI in the public sector.
For example, Australia developed policy tools, such as the “Artificial Intelligence Ethics Framework” and
the “Automated decision-making Better Practice Guide”, aimed at providing direction to government
officials for the ethical use and management of algorithms. In Colombia, the Ethical Framework for Artificial
Intelligence 37 offers a series of principles, along with a methodology for their implementation, that should
be considered in the design, development, and implementation of AI systems. Canada’s Guide on the use
of generative AI 38 advises public sector organisations to be aware of amplification of biases that might be
dominant in the training of data and requires to mitigate them from the planning and design stage. Japan
developed the "AI Guidelines for Business" in April 2024, outlining critical factors to consider when
developing, providing, or using AI 39. These Guidelines are intended for all AI business actors, including
public institutions such as governments and municipalities. They incorporate the international guiding
principles and international code of conduct for advanced AI systems, as compiled in the Hiroshima AI
Process. Other tools include France’s guide for public algorithms’ transparency 40, Ireland’s Interim
Guidelines for Use of AI in the Public Service 41, the Netherlands’ guide on governance for a responsible
application of AI 42, and the United Kingdom’s Algorithmic Transparency Recording Standard 43. At the
sub-national level, some cities have been adopting standards on digital rights, such as the Cities Coalition
for Digital Rights 44, representing over 50 cities worldwide. These standards are being put into practice
through projects like open registries of public algorithms 45, a Global Observatory of Urban AI 46 or a Digital
Rights Governance Project 47.
Various countries are updating their regulatory frameworks to support a safe, secure and trustworthy AI
use in the public sector. For example, Canada’s federal government issued the Treasury Board Directive
on Automated Decision-Making 48, a mandatory policy instrument to ensure that automation in
administrative decision-making in the federal public service is compatible with administrative legal
principles such as transparency, accountability, legality, and procedural fairness. The Directive also
requests that the Gender-based Analysis Plus 49 analytical tool is used during the development or
modification of an AI system to understand its impact on different population groups. Similar efforts can be
observed elsewhere, such as the United States’ 2024 Executive Order on Advancing Governance,
GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

16 |
Innovation, and Risk Management for Agency Use of Artificial Intelligence 50 setting guidelines for the
responsible use of AI across the federal government. In the European Union, the adopted AI Act 51
establishes a novel regulatory framework, also impacting the use of AI systems in the public sector (see
Box ).

Box 2. The EU AI Act and its implications for the public sector
The EU AI Act is a European regulation on AI agreed in negotiations with member states in December
2023 and approved by the European Parliament in March 2024. The regulation establishes
obligations for AI based on its potential risks and level of impact. Furthermore, the Act fosters a
reformed institutional architecture both within individual countries and at the European level. The Act
identifies different levels of risks which are relevant for governments’ use of AI.

Risk levels and obligations
The AI Act defines four risk levels:
•

Unacceptable risk: AI uses under this category are prohibited by the AI Act. Examples include
predictive policing, ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification (including facial recognition) in
publicly accessible spaces for law enforcement, social scoring, or assessing the risk of an
individual committing criminal offenses. Law enforcement and justice are among the public
sector policy areas most concerned by this category, although some exceptions apply, such as
use cases concerned with national security and those remaining subject to judicial oversight.

•

High-risk - AI uses under this category are allowed but regulated due to their significant
potential harm to health, safety, fundamental rights, environment, democracy, and the rule of
law. Due to its potential impact on these aspects, most public sector uses of AI might fall under
this category. Examples include systems used to influence the outcome of elections and voter
behaviour, automated processing of personal data to assess various aspects of a person’s life,
assessing eligibility to benefits and services, and safety components used in the management
and operation of critical infrastructure. Obligations include establishing a risk management
system, conducting data governance, having in place technical documentation to demonstrate
compliance, mandatory fundamental rights impact assessment, among others.

•

Limited risk – These systems might include chatbots, deep fakes, emotion recognition
systems, among others, and have transparency obligations where developers and deployers
must ensure that end-users are aware that they are interacting with AI.

•

Minimal risk – These systems are unregulated, but a code of conduct is suggested. Examples
include video games and spam filters.

Governance Framework
The Act also introduces a restructured governance framework at both national and European levels.
Each member state must designate one or more National Competent Authorities to supervise the
Act’s enforcement. At the European level, the European Artificial Intelligence Board will gather
official points of contact of each Member country to ensure uniform application across member states.
It will be complemented by an advisory forum, representing a balanced selection of stakeholders, and
a new European AI Office, to be established within the Commission, which will be supported by a
Scientific Panel of Independent Experts.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 17
Source: (Future of Life Institute, 2024[18]); https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room/20240308IPR19015/artificial-intelligenceact-meps-adopt-landmark-law, https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Expert-explainer-The-EU-AI-Act-11-April2022.pdf , https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/qanda_21_1683

Supporting implementation
Public sector organisations are being encouraged to test AI systems, but numerous implementation
challenges persist, as AI remains largely experimental and there is not yet a robust track record of
systematic use in the public sector, nor on the resources (human and financial) required to scale initial
efforts (OECD, 2024[10]). Countries have been deploying diverse initiatives to enhance their capacity to use
AI effectively and efficiently in the public sector, including the following:
•

Developing core digital public infrastructure to support AI use and development and help increase
traction and adoption. For instance, Estonia is developing three sets of reusable core components
for service development: first, data and open data catalogues and portals; second, data processing
tools (e.g. consent service 52, data tracker 53, and anonymisation); and third, basic AI tools to be reused across various other AI applications (e.g. virtual assistant 54, speech synthesis, translation
tools, text analysis toolkit, among others). Findings from the 2023 OECD OURdata Index also
reveal that OECD countries have improved the quality of open government data, which can be
instrumental for the development of AI models (OECD, 2023[19]).

•

Establishing and maintaining a digitally capable workforce, which requires the public sector to
become better at attracting and retaining relevant digital talent, in addition to offering skills
development programmes for civil servants to increase their awareness on potential risks and
increase their capacity to take informed decisions on the procurement, development, deployment
and use of AI. For example, Finland’s Elements of AI 55 is a free and open course to help both
citizens and public servants gain a solid understanding of AI. In Estonia, the skills development
programme includes a data expert network with 500+ participants, AI meetups, experimentation
events (e.g., hackatons, competitions), and public e-courses on AI. In Ireland an AI upskilling
programme for civil servants has been in place since 2021 as part of the public service
transformation strategy, ‘Better Public Services’. Civil and public servants interested in learning
how AI could be used to transform public service delivery have access to short courses. Among its
offerings is an online course that guides participants in designing potential AI projects that could
benefit from strategic investment 56.

•

Securing a whole-of-government approach to digital government investments to maximise the
impact of AI systems and support their successful implementation. By developing a coordinated
approach when investing in the digital transformation of the public sector, governments can
promote a coherent and strategic adoption of AI in the public sector, mitigating potential risks and
securing value-for-money. A structured approach to digital government investments can help
governments deploy AI solutions coherently across government, for example by leveraging value
proposition and funding to secure standards compliance in terms of algorithmic transparency,
trustworthy and responsible use of data. Governments can also adopt dedicated funding
mechanisms to promote AI adoption across the administration aligning individual investments with
strategic goals. For example, Estonia has successfully integrated AI solutions into its public
service infrastructure, enhancing responsiveness and reliability for its citizens. It has also created
flexible and dedicated funding opportunities to support the uptake of AI in the public sector,
including through structural funds, joint procurements, and new upcoming funding measures 57.

•

Enhancing the capacity for effective procurement of AI by government entities can stimulate
innovation and shape the development of AI solutions aligned with government policy and societal

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

18 |
values, including through partnerships with GovTech startups (Farrell et al., 2023[2]). Procurement
standards such as IEEE P3119 58 are being developed to help public organisations strengthen their
requirements for AI procurement in the public sector. Governments are also standardising
contractual clauses to support public organisations wishing to procure AI systems developed by
external suppliers. For example, in 2023, the European Commission published the EU model
contractual AI clauses to provide a clear and consistent framework for AI procurement, ensuring
that all parties have a common understanding of the terms and conditions 59. These represent a
proposal for standard contractual clauses for the procurement of AI, developed by a community of
public buyers. There are two versions of these clauses: one for high-risk AI systems and another
for non-high-risk systems. Public procurement rules can also be leveraged to embed ethical
standards in how governments purchase AI solutions. For instance, the Guidelines for AI
Procurement in the United Kingdom includes a set of principles on how to buy AI technology, as
well as insights on tackling challenges that may arise during procurement 60. Canada opted for
another approach to support the ethical purchase and deployment of AI through the establishment
of a list of pre-qualified suppliers who can provide responsible and effective AI services, solutions
and products, streamlining procurement processes of public organisations that need to comply
with the country's Directive on Automated Decision-Making 61.
•

Leveraging partnerships with actors from outside of the public sector (e.g., scientific communities,
or academic institutions) to gain external expertise for the development of AI policies or initiatives.
For instance, the United Kingdom does this through the Public Policy Programme 62 at The Alan
Turing Institute. In the United States, the TechFAR Handbook 63 highlights flexibilities in the
country’s 2,000+ page procurement regulations, allowing agencies to work with start-ups and
conduct iterative, user-driven service development.

Securing monitoring and oversight
Finally, monitoring the effectiveness of policies for AI in the public sector and assessing their
implementation and impact is crucial to foster trust, and ensure their long-term sustainability. Currently,
setting-up transparency, monitoring and oversight mechanisms on AI in the public sector remains a
challenge in most countries. Some countries are exploring different mechanisms and institutions, for:
•

Monitoring the use and impact of AI in the public sector to understand if the promise of better
delivery of policies and services, improved decision-making processes, and greater productivity is
being fulfilled. At a global level, the OECD AI Incidents Monitor (AIM) is being used to keep track
of AI incidents and hazards, including in the public sector. Its goal is to assist policymakers, AI
practitioners, and other stakeholders gaining valuable insights into the risks and harms of AI
systems. 64 Countries are also developing their own monitoring mechanisms to assess AI impact.
For instance, in Türkiye, the Digital Transformation Office of the Presidency of the Republic
conducts the "AI Risk Management Recommendation" and "Trustworthy AI Seal" studies to closely
monitor the use of AI for public benefit. As a baseline for impact measurement, many governments
are also developing standards for algorithm accountability in the public sector, such as algorithm
registers. The purpose is to ensure the transparency of the data used to train AI systems, of the
objectives they are used for, or of how potential impacts or risks on individuals or society are being
assessed. Registries also provide citizens a way to evaluate or question governments’ application
of AI, but there are few cases at the central/federal level. For instance, Canada’s requires the
publication of completed Algorithmic Impact Assessments 65 and the Netherlands’ Algorithm
Register 66 has similar objectives. Measuring the actual impact of AI projects remains an area of
opportunity across countries, with the need to go beyond the baseline provided by algorithmic
transparency instruments. As a response to this challenge at the European Union level, a report
by the Joint Research Centre recommended adopting value-oriented AI impact assessment coGOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 19
created frameworks that prioritise sustainability over mere return-on-investment, “including
optimisation of savings in terms of human, financial and environmental costs, increased efficiency,
enhanced effectiveness in service delivery, service quality and trustworthiness, improved
relevance and contextualisation” (Manzoni et al., 2022[20]).
•

Securing oversight of the proper development and use of AI within the public sector by nonexecutive branches of government (e.g., judiciary and parliament as mentioned above) and
accountability institutions (e.g., access to information agencies, data protection agencies,
ombudspersons, audit offices), which is progressively gaining traction 67. For example, Norway’s
Office of the Auditor General (OAG) is auditing the use of AI in the central government since 2023
as part of its pipeline of new performance audits 68. Additionally, in its Strategic Plan 2018-2024,
the OAG also envisions using AI for service delivery, highlighting that “problem solving will become
more automated, and the use of [AI] will gradually take over tasks in both the public administration
and the OAG” 69. In the United Kingdom, the National Audit Office (NAO) reported in March 2024
that 70% of the government bodies that were surveyed were piloting or planning the use of AI to
support operational decision-making and improve internal processes 70. The report highlighted the
potential risks to value for money that may arise in the absence of a clear identification of the
institution responsible for the implementation of the AI adoption strategy for the public sector. This
may hinder the wide-scale benefits achievable through tackling jointly common issues of ageing
IT infrastructure, risks, skills gaps, and data issues. Around the world, countries are exploring new
accountability structures, such as the Spanish new independent Artificial Intelligence Supervision
Agency 71 also mentioned above, or instruments for auditors, such as the frameworks for assessing
whether algorithms meet quality criteria by the United States’ Government Accountability Office
(GAO) 72 and Court of Auditors (NCA) in the Netherlands 73.

•

Enforcing regulations across public sector institutions, with varying approaches, can also help
promote the development of risk-based approaches. While the EU AI Act foresees its enforcement
under single national regulators, in other instances the responsibility for regulatory delivery and
enforcement may be shared between several institutions. The United Kingdom for example is
laying the groundwork for its future model of AI regulation along with its new Data Protection and
Digital Information Bill. The plan is to give responsibility to several institutions the UK
communications regulator (OFCOM), the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA), the
Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO), the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) are on the list, with some that can
expect their competences and powers to be updated.

•

Strengthening transparency to enhance accountability, based on the understanding that functional
transparency mechanisms are fundamental to challenge or seek redress for an outcome of an AI
system (OECD, 2023[21]). Current data protection and access to information legislation and
institutions are already present in 134 countries worldwide, including 37 OECD Members (OECD,
2022[22]). This can be used in some instances to strengthen AI transparency, in addition to the
initiatives mentioned above focused on the monitoring of impact and use, e.g. such as the
provisions for ex ante and ex post (social and ethical) impact assessments seen as important
safeguards. However, more specific requirements and involvement from non-executive oversight
institutions might also be needed to increase proactive disclosure of AI algorithms by the public
sector and provide means of recourse in case of misuse. For instance, Chile’s Transparency
Council is developing a General Instruction on Algorithmic Transparency that will mandate more
than a thousand public agencies to disclose the algorithms they employ in providing services to
the population, allowing citizens to understand whether the services they receive are driven by
algorithmic models and understand the underlying decision-making logic 74. Furthermore, to
enhance transparency in the use of AI, several countries are creating inventories of use cases.
These include the United States where public sector institutions are required to annually release

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

20 |
public inventories of AI use cases, and to highlight the ones that impact rights or safety and indicate
how the agency is addressing the relevant risks 75.
These policy issues and the diversity of approaches highlight the need for further sharing of knowledge
and exchange of good practices in terms of countries’ policies and practices to ensure the responsible
deployment of AI in the public sector. This can foster a structured policy dialogue amongst OECD member
and partner countries to better understand the implications and steer a responsible use of AI in the public
sector. The following section presents a preliminary framework conceived for this purpose.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 21

4 Towards a framework for a

trustworthy use of AI in the public
sector

The OECD is developing a framework to support governments in the responsible use of AI in the public
sector. This framework outlines the essential enablers and guardrails that governments can consider to
address existing constraints for a trustworthy use of AI. Moreover, it emphasises the engagement of
diverse stakeholders in both the design and implementation phases of AI initiatives in the public sector to
increase productivity, responsiveness, and accountability, as desired impacts (Figure 1).
The proposed framework is based on the evidence collected by the Secretariat and is intended to foster
dialogue on how governments can frame the development and deployment of AI in the public sector in a
coherent, safe, secure and trustworthy manner. Given the rapid development and evolving nature of AI,
the framework will be updated and adapted periodically to remain fit for purpose, building on the increasing
number of evidence and use cases collected from across OECD countries.
The preliminary framework acknowledges the importance of emerging global standards and international
collaboration to address the existing policy challenges. In particular, it is developed in the context of
ongoing AI work at the OECD, such as the Recommendation on AI (OECD, 2023[21]) and the Framework
of Tools for Trustworthy AI (OECD, 2021[4]).
The framework is organised around three policy questions and four policy measures, as detailed in Table 2
and represented in Figure 1.
•

The policy questions address three crucial aspects of public policy design:
o

•

what actions to take, who to engage, and why these actions are necessary. The
application of the framework supports in how to implement actions, providing guidance for
governments on the adoption of a holistic approach to a trustworthy AI in the public sector.

The policy questions are complemented by policy options and actions:
o

on what actions - governments can deploy enablers in the fields of governance,
capabilities, and collaborations and partnerships, and can develop a set of guardrails to
guide, monitor and keep public institutions accountable.

o

on who to engage - governments can develop engagement strategies involving a wide
range of stakeholders listed in the description column in Table 2.

o

on why - governments can consider three potential impacts outlined in Table 1.
Understanding the use of AI in the public sector, in order to align AI usage with relevant
public policy objectives.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

22 |

Table 2. Policy questions and measures - framework for trustworthy use of AI in the public sector
Policy
question

Policy
measure

What concrete policy actions and tools
can governments develop to address
existing constraints for a trustworthy
use of AI in the public sector?

Guardrails

Enablers

Who should governments engage when
developing and implementing the
enablers and guardrails for the
trustworthy use of AI in the public
sector?
What impact should the public sector
strive to achieve when using trustworthy
AI?

Engagement

Impact

Description
Policy actions to establish a solid enabling environment and unlock the full-scale
adoption of AI in the public sector. These include governance, capabilities (e.g.
infrastructure, data, skills and talent), collaborations and partnerships in areas where
policy makers currently identify constraints and shortcomings.
Policy tools that governments can consider developing for a responsible, trustworthy
and human-centred use of AI in the public sector. These may include soft laws and
guidance as standards; policies; laws and regulations; enforcement mechanisms;
oversight bodies (beyond the executive); monitoring bodies (within the executive); or
collective agreements with public sector workforce.
Different stakeholders that need to be engaged in building the foundations for a
responsible use of AI in the public sector. Various actors across the public sector (e.g.
ministries, civil servants, sub-national governments), in the broader ecosystem and
beyond national jurisdictions would need to be engaged through targeted actions to
effectively address policy challenges related to the use of AI in the public sector.
In connection with the AI uses cases taxonomy (see Table 1), AI in the public sector
should strive for increasing productivity, responsiveness, and accountability.

Source: Authors.

Figure 1. Preliminary framework for trustworthy use of AI in the public sector

Source: Authors.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 23

5 Conclusions
The use cases analysed in this paper show there is a clear potential for AI, if managed responsibly with
the necessary safeguards, to positively transform how governments operate, formulate policies, deliver
services and remain accountable. There is also growing awareness of the risks associated with the use of
AI in the public sector. In recent years governments have undertaken a wide range of initiatives to create
an enabling environment to responsibly govern with AI. The initiatives range from establishing new
institutional arrangements and strategies to secure political and public support, to developing dedicated
policies to effectively prevent and address failures or mitigate risks. Investments in capabilities and
monitoring mechanisms are also acknowledged as critical tools for effectively deploying and overseeing
the responsible use of AI. Nonetheless, there is a need for a more comprehensive, consistent and shared
approach across public sectors.
There are alternative policy options governments can consider to establish an enabling environment for a
trustworthy use of AI in the public sector. Building on the use cases analyses what seems to emerge is a
commonality in the framing of the questions and the identification of the policy measures - enablers,
guardrails, engagement – that governments can take to deliver the expected impacts. Section four of this
paper proposes some actions that can be adopted at the national level, to guide public sectors in their
pursuit of a safe, secure, and trustworthy use of AI. It provides also a common language for collecting
evidence on successful and less positive experiences, fostering peer-learning and enhancing co-operation
globally in addressing common challenges.
Looking ahead, understanding, promoting and enabling the positive aspects of using AI, rather than only
preventing the negative ones, will remain a priority, since focusing mainly on risks might deter the
deployment of high-benefit, low-risk uses of AI to improve public services. The systematic collection,
documentation, and analysis of use cases on AI in the public sector will be needed to monitor trends on
policy options across countries. More and better evidence of the impact of AI on governments will help
ensure it is used for optimal impact. Easy access to such evidence, as well as information on policies,
practices, and f AI systems used in the public sector – for example, via a global repository – could foster a
structured dialogue and exchanges among countries.
The promotion of trustworthy use of AI will also require indicators and qualitative evidence on
implementation and impacts. Finally, a trustworthy use of AI is the result of a collective effort that demands
multistakeholder engagement and dialogue across policy sectors and beyond national borders to share
lessons and jointly explore policy options as new challenges and opportunities emerge.

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

24 |

References

Ada Lovelace Institute, AI Now Institute and Open Government Partnership (2021),
Algorithmic Accountability for the Public Sector,
https://www.opengovpartnership.org/documents/algorithmic-accountability-public-sector/.

[30]

Berryhill, J. et al. (2019), “Hello, World: Artificial intelligence and its use in the public sector”,
OECD Working Papers on Public Governance, No. 36, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/726fd39d-en.

[24]

Broecke, S. (2023), “Artificial intelligence and labour market matching”, OECD Social,
Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 284, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/2b440821-en.

[12]

Datta, P. et al. (2023), “GiusBERTo: Italy’s AI-Based Judicial Transformation: A Teaching
Case”, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 53/1,
https://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol53/iss1/33 (accessed on 13 October 2023).

[11]

Farrell, E. et al. (2023), Artificial Intelligence for the Public Sector, Publications Office of the
European Union, https://doi.org/doi:10.2760/91814.

[2]

Future of Life Institute (2024), AI Act Overview, https://artificialintelligenceact.eu/wpcontent/uploads/2024/01/AI-Act-Overview_24-01-2024.pdf (accessed on 10 April 2024).

[18]

González, F., T. Ortiz and R. Sánchez Ávalos (2020), IA Responsable: Manual técnico: Ciclo
de vida de la inteligencia artificial, Inter-American Development Bank,
https://doi.org/10.18235/0002876.

[3]

Lorenz, P., K. Perset and J. Berryhill (2023), “Initial policy considerations for generative
artificial intelligence”, OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 1, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/fae2d1e6-en.

[29]

Manzoni, M. et al. (2022), AI WatchRoad to the adoption of Artificial Intelligence by the Public
Sector: A Handbook for Policymakers, Public Administrations and Relevant Stakeholders,
Publications Office of the European Union,
https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC129100.

[20]

OECD (2024), “2023 OECD Digital Government Index: Results and key findings”, OECD
Public Governance Policy Papers, No. 44, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1a89ed5e-en.

[10]

OECD (2024), Anti-Corruption and Integrity Outlook 2024, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/968587cd-en.

[9]

OECD (2023), “2023 OECD Open, Useful and Re-usable data (OURdata) Index: Results and
key findings”, OECD Public Governance Policy Papers, No. 43, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/a37f51c3-en.

[19]

OECD (2023), Global Trends in Government Innovation 2023, OECD Public Governance
Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0655b570-en.

[25]

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 25
OECD (2023), Government at a Glance 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/3d5c5d31-en.

[26]

OECD (2023), “Leveraging artificial intelligence for proactive delivery of public policies and
services”, in Government at a Glance 2023, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/5702d250-en.

[27]

OECD (2023), Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence (amended),
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0449.

[21]

OECD (2023), “The state of implementation of the OECD AI Principles four years on”, OECD
Artificial Intelligence Papers, No. 3, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/835641c9-en.

[17]

OECD (2022), Digital Government Review of Luxembourg: Towards More Digital, Innovative
and Inclusive Public Services, OECD Digital Government Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/b623803d-en.

[31]

OECD (2022), “OECD Framework for the Classification of AI systems”, OECD Digital
Economy Papers, No. 323, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/cb6d9eca-en.

[7]

OECD (2022), The Protection and Promotion of Civic Space: Strengthening Alignment with
International Standards and Guidance, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/d234e975-en.

[22]

OECD (2022), “Transforming public governance for digital democracy”, in Building Trust and
Reinforcing Democracy: Preparing the Ground for Government Action, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/01b73275-en.

[13]

OECD (2021), Countering Public Grant Fraud in Spain: Machine Learning for Assessing Risks
and Targeting Control Activities, OECD Public Governance Reviews, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/0ea22484-en.

[14]

OECD (2021), Data-Driven, Information-Enabled Regulatory Delivery, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/8f99ec8c-en.

[38]

OECD (2021), G20 Compendium on the Use of Digital Tools for Public Service
Continuity: Report for the G20 Digital Economy Tak Force, Trieste, Italy, August 2021,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/6f800fd5-en.

[23]

OECD (2021), G20 survey on Agile approaches to the regulatory governance of
innovation: Report for the G20 Digital Economy Task Force, Trieste, Italy, August 2021,
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/f161916d-en.

[36]

OECD (2021), Good Practice Principles for Data Ethics in the Public Sector,
https://www.oecd.org/gov/digital-government/good-practice-principles-for-data-ethics-inthe-public-sector.pdf.

[34]

OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council for Agile Regulatory Governance to Harness
Innovation, https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0464.

[37]

OECD (2021), Recommendation of the Council on Enhancing Access to and Sharing of Data,
https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0463.

[33]

OECD (2021), “State of implementation of the OECD AI Principles: Insights from national AI

[5]

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

26 |
policies”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 311, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/1cd40c44-en.
OECD (2021), “The OECD Framework for digital talent and skills in the public sector”, OECD
Working Papers on Public Governance, No. 45, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/4e7c3f58-en.

[28]

OECD (2021), “Tools for trustworthy AI: A framework to compare implementation tools for
trustworthy AI systems”, OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 312, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/008232ec-en.

[4]

OECD (2020), Building Capacity for Evidence-Informed Policy-Making: Lessons from Country
Experiences, OECD Public Governance Reviews, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/86331250-en.

[8]

OECD (2019), The Path to Becoming a Data-Driven Public Sector, OECD Digital Government
Studies, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/059814a7-en.

[32]

OECD/CAF (2022), The Strategic and Responsible Use of Artificial Intelligence in the Public
Sector of Latin America and the Caribbean, OECD Public Governance Reviews, OECD
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/1f334543-en.

[6]

Oliveira, T., A. Monteiro da Rocha and M. Scatolino de Rezende (2022), “Alice: Desafios,
resultados e perspectivas da ferramenta de auditoria contínua de compras públicas
governamentais com uso de inteligência artificial”, Revista da CGU, Vol. 14/26,
https://doi.org/10.36428/revistadacgu.v14i26.530.

[15]

Tangi, L. et al. (2022), AI Watch. European landscape on the use of Artificial Intelligence by
the Public Sector, Publications Office of the European Union,
https://doi.org/doi:10.2760/39336.

[35]

Ubaldi, B. et al. (2019), “State of the art in the use of emerging technologies in the public
sector”, OECD Working Papers on Public Governance, No. 31, OECD Publishing, Paris,
https://doi.org/10.1787/932780bc-en.

[1]

Wong, J. et al. (2022), “Key challenges for the participatory governance of AI in public
administration”, SocArXiv, https://doi.org/10.31219/OSF.IO/PDCRM.

[16]

End notes
1

Throughout this paper, artificial intelligence (AI) will refer to a machine-based system that, for explicit or
implicit objectives, infers, from the input it receives, how to generate outputs such as predictions, content,
recommendations, or decisions that can influence physical or virtual environments. Different AI systems
vary in their levels of autonomy and adaptiveness after deployment (OECD, 2023[21]).
2

The OECD has previously documented the use of AI in the public sector and its policy implications. This
paper builds upon policy analysis on AI in the public sector developed throughout conceptual pieces

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 27
(Ubaldi et al., 2019[1]; Berryhill et al., 2019[24]), a compendium of best practices for the G20 (OECD,
2021[23]), reviews and standards on data-informed approaches to rule making and enforcement, including
the use of AI solutions (OECD, 2021[38]; OECD, 2021[36]; OECD, 2021[37]), national and regional reviews
(OECD, 2022[31]; OECD/CAF, 2022[6]), global government innovation trends reporting (OECD, 2023[25]),
and more recently as part of ‘Government at a Glance 2023’ (OECD, 2023[27]) and the 2023 editions of the
OECD Digital Government Index (OECD, 2024[10]) and OURdata Index (OECD, 2023[19]).
3

https://ai-magazine.vngrealisatie.nl/nijmegen/

4

https://www.boost.ai/case-studies/how-conversational-ai-is-helping-norways-citizens-with-covid

5

For further information, see: https://tc.canada.ca/en/programs/pre-load-air-cargo-targeting-pact and
https://canadagazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p1/2023/2023-03-18/html/reg5-eng.html
6

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2022/05/movement-ban-government-use-face-recognition

7

https://www.unesco.org/en/articles/recommendation-ethics-artificial-intelligence

8

https://www.japan.go.jp/kizuna/2024/02/hiroshima_ai_process.html

9

https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai

10

https://www.coe.int/en/web/artificial-intelligence/the-framework-convention-on-artificial-intelligence

11

https://news.un.org/en/story/2024/03/1147831

12

https://innovazione.gov.it/notizie/articoli/en/g7-ministerial-declaration-on-industry-technology-anddigital/
13

For a comprehensive taxonomy of AI systems, refer to the OECD Framework for the Classification of AI
Systems (OECD, 2022[7]).

14

A non-exhaustive list of AI use cases in the public sector across OECD countries is available upon
request. Interested parties may contact eleaders@oecd.org for access to the data. Also refer to the
European Commission’s Public Sector Tech Watch, which includes a systematic collection of more than a
thousand
public
sector
use
cases
across
the
European
Union:
https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/public-sector-tech-watch/cases.

15

“Generative artificial intelligence (AI) systems create new content in response to prompts based on their
training data” (Lorenz, Perset and Berryhill, 2023, p. 8[29]).

16

https://www.france-services.gouv.fr/actualites/experimentation-dun-modele-dassistance-franceservices-IA
17

https://www.bolagsverket.se/omoss/press/pressmeddelanden/pressmeddelanden2023/aimodellsortera
rmyndighetensinkorg.4936.html
18

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-to-harness-the-power-of-ai-to-improve-publicproject-delivery-under-new-framework

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

28 |
19

https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/wastelands-a/

20

https://www.paris-saclay.com/fileadmin/documents/1._L_agglo/Espace_Presse/ParisSaclay_Twin_2030.pdf
21

https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/auroraai/

22

“Personalisation: Develops a profile of an individual and then learns and adapts to that individual over
time. The output is usually a ranking, e.g. a search engine ranking.” (OECD, 2022, p. 50[7]).

23

https://neyimvar.gov.tr/giris

24

https://www.kratid.ee/kasutuslood-kratid and https://joinup.ec.europa.eu/collection/public-sector-techwatch/cases
25

See for instance the Catalogue of Tools & Metrics for Trustworthy AI of the OECD AI Policy Observatory
(https://oecd.ai/en/catalogue/overview).

26

"Algorithmic accountability is defined as ensuring that those that build, procure and use algorithms are
eventually answerable for their impacts” (Ada Lovelace Institute, AI Now Institute and Open Government
Partnership, 2021, p. 4[30]). Its importance has been globally recognised in policy fora, for instance through
the OECD Recommendation of the Council on Artificial Intelligence, which establishes that “AI actors
should be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems”. Algorithmic accountability relies on
concepts of algorithmic transparency, which refers to the availability and accessibility of information on
these algorithms, such as the data used, the source code, the algorithm’s goals and usage, and compliance
with certain standards.
27

https://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/dfd/id810/

28

https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/ai-office

29

https://algorithmic-transparency.ec.europa.eu/index_en

30

https://espanadigital.gob.es/actualidad/aprobado-el-estatuto-de-la-agencia-espanola-de-supervisionde-la-inteligencia-artificial
31

https://democracy-technologies.org/participation/belgium-citizens-assembly-ai/

32

https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/M-24-10-Advancing-Governance-Innovationand-Risk-Management-for-Agency-Use-of-Artificial-Intelligence.pdf
33

https://www.dta.gov.au/blogs/ai-government-taskforce-examining-use-and-governance-ai-aps

34

https://www.conseil-etat.fr/publications-colloques/etudes/intelligence-artificielle-et-action-publiqueconstruire-la-confiance-servir-la-performance
35

https://www.fonction-publique.gouv.fr/toutes-les-publications/strategie-dusage-de-lintelligenceartificielle-en-matiere-de-gestion-des-ressources-humaines-dans-la-fonction-publique-de-letat
36

https://oecd.ai/en/wonk/documents/uruguay-ai-strategy-for-the-digital-government-2019

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 29
37

https://inteligenciaartificial.gov.co/marco-eticos/

38

https://www.canada.ca/en/government/system/digital-government/digital-governmentinnovations/responsible-use-ai/guide-use-generative-ai.html
39

https://www.meti.go.jp/shingikai/mono_info_service/ai_shakai_jisso/pdf/20240419_9.pdf

40

https://guides.etalab.gouv.fr/algorithmes/guide/#_3-le-cadre-juridique-applicable

41

https://www.gov.ie/en/publication/2127d-interim-guidelines-for-use-of-ai/

42

https://www.berenschot.nl/media/vf5fj1mw/handreiking_governance-voor-een-verantwoordetoepassing-van-algoritmen.pdf
43

https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/algorithmic-transparency-standard/

44

https://citiesfordigitalrights.org/

45

https://aiforgood.itu.int/helsinki-and-amsterdam-launch-ai-registers-to-detail-city-systems/

46

https://gouai.cidob.org/

47

https://citiesfordigitalrights.org/digitalrightsgovernance

48

https://www.tbs-sct.canada.ca/pol/doc-eng.aspx?id=32592

49

https://women-gender-equality.canada.ca/en/gender-based-analysis-plus.html

50

https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/M-24-10-Advancing-Governance-Innovationand-Risk-Management-for-Agency-Use-of-Artificial-Intelligence.pdf
51

https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai

52

https://www.ria.ee/en/state-information-system/people-centred-data-exchange/consent-service

53

https://e-estonia.com/data-tracker-build-citizen-trust/

54

See Bürokratt virtual assistant, https://www.ria.ee/en/state-information-system/machine-learning-andlanguage-technology-solutions/burokratt
55

https://www.elementsofai.com/eu2019fi

56

https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/ai-certification-ireland/

57

https://ai-watch.ec.europa.eu/countries/estonia/estonia-ai-strategy-report_en

58

See IEEE P3119 Standard for the Procurement of Artificial Intelligence and Automated Decision
Systems from 2021 (https://standards.ieee.org/ieee/3119/10729/).

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

30 |
59

https://public-buyers-community.ec.europa.eu/communities/procurement-ai/resources/eu-modelcontractual-ai-clauses-pilot-procurements-ai
60

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/60b356228fa8f5489723d170/Guidelines_for_AI_procur
ement.pdf
61

https://www.canada.ca/en/government/system/digital-government/digital-governmentinnovations/responsible-use-ai/list-interested-artificial-intelligence-ai-suppliers.html
62

https://www.turing.ac.uk/research/research-programmes/public-policy

63

https://playbook.cio.gov/techfar/

64

AIM: The OECD AI Incidents Monitor, an evidence base for trustworthy AI - OECD.AI

65

https://www.canada.ca/en/government/system/digital-government/digital-governmentinnovations/responsible-use-ai/algorithmic-impact-assessment.html
66

https://algoritmes.overheid.nl/

67

See for instance “Auditing machine learning algorithms”, a white paper for public auditors released by
the Supreme Audit Institutions of Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and the UK:
https://www.auditingalgorithms.net/. On work being developed by data protection agencies, see for
instance the Dutch Data Protection Authority’s “Periodic insight into the risks and effects of the use of AI &
algorithms
in
the
Netherlands”
(https://www.autoriteitpersoonsgegevens.nl/uploads/202401/AI%20%26%20Algorithmic%20Risks%20Report%20Netherlands%20%20winter%202023%202024.pdf). On work being developed by ombudspersons, see for instance The
European Ombudsman’s inquiry to the European Commission on how it decides on and uses AI in its
decision making (https://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/en/news-document/en/183633).
68

https://www.riksrevisjonen.no/contentassets/9e1061c5f7fe4678b4b93e5d1e5bb611/annual-report2022.pdf
69

https://www.riksrevisjonen.no/globalassets/omriksrevisjonen/auditingtobenefitthesocietyoftomorrow.pdf
70

https://www.nao.org.uk/reports/use-of-artificial-intelligence-in-government/

71

https://espanadigital.gob.es/lineas-de-actuacion/agencia-nacional-de-supervision-de-la-inteligenciaartificial and https://boe.es/diario_boe/txt.php?id=BOE-A-2023-18911
72

https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-519sp

73

https://www.rekenkamer.nl/onderwerpen/algoritmes/algoritmes-toetsingskader/

74

https://oecd-opsi.org/blog/chile-algorithmic-transparency/

75

https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/03/M-24-10-Advancing-Governance-Innovationand-Risk-Management-for-Agency-Use-of-Artificial-Intelligence.pdf

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

| 31

GOVERNING WITH ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: ARE GOVERNMENTS READY? ©OECD 2024

