Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrism,
and Latin America

Anibal Quijano

W

hat is termed globalization is the culmination of a process that began with the constitution of America and colonial/modern Eurocentered capitalism as a new global power. One of the
fundamental axes of this model of power is the social classification of the
world’s population around the idea of race, a mental construction that expresses the basic experience of colonial domination and pervades the more
important dimensions of global power, including its specific rationality:
Eurocentrism. The racial axis has a colonial origin and character, but it
has proven to be more durable and stable than the colonialism in whose
matrix it was established. Therefore, the model of power that is globally
hegemonic today presupposes an element of coloniality. In what follows,
my primary aim is to open up some of the theoretically necessary questions
about the implications of coloniality of power regarding the history of Latin
America.1
America and the New Model of Global Power
2

America was constituted as the first space/time of a new model of power
of global vocation, and both in this way and by it became the first identity of modernity. Two historical processes associated in the production of
that space/time converged and established the two fundamental axes of the
new model of power. One was the codification of the differences between
conquerors and conquered in the idea of “race,” a supposedly different biological structure that placed some in a natural situation of inferiority to
the others. The conquistadors assumed this idea as the constitutive, founding element of the relations of domination that the conquest imposed. On

N e p a n t l a : V i e w s f r o m S o u t h 1.3
Copyright 2000 by Duke University Press
533

534

Nepantla

this basis, the population of America, and later the world, was classified
within the new model of power. The other process was the constitution of a
new structure of control of labor and its resources and products. This new
structure was an articulation of all historically known previous structures
of control of labor, slavery, serfdom, small independent commodity production and reciprocity, together around and upon the basis of capital and
the world market.3
Race: A Mental Category of Modernity

The idea of race, in its modern meaning, does not have a known history
before the colonization of America. Perhaps it originated in reference to
the phenotypic differences between conquerors and conquered.4 However,
what matters is that soon it was constructed to refer to the supposed differential biological structures between those groups.
Social relations founded on the category of race produced new
historical social identities in America—Indians, blacks, and mestizos—
and redefined others. Terms such as Spanish and Portuguese, and much later
European, which until then indicated only geographic origin or country
of origin, acquired from then on a racial connotation in reference to the
new identities. Insofar as the social relations that were being configured
were relations of domination, such identities were considered constitutive
of the hierarchies, places, and corresponding social roles, and consequently
of the model of colonial domination that was being imposed. In other
words, race and racial identity were established as instruments of basic
social classification.
As time went by, the colonizers codified the phenotypic trait of
the colonized as color, and they assumed it as the emblematic characteristic
of racial category. That category was probably initially established in the
area of Anglo-America. There so-called blacks were not only the most
important exploited group, since the principal part of the economy rested
on their labor; they were, above all, the most important colonized race, since
Indians were not part of that colonial society. Why the dominant group calls
itself “white” is a story related to racial classification.5
In America, the idea of race was a way of granting legitimacy to the
relations of domination imposed by the conquest. After the colonization of
America and the expansion of European colonialism to the rest of the world,
the subsequent constitution of Europe as a new id-entity needed the elaboration of a Eurocentric perspective of knowledge, a theoretical perspective on
the idea of race as a naturalization of colonial relations between Europeans

535

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

and non-Europeans. Historically, this meant a new way of legitimizing
the already old ideas and practices of relations of superiority/inferiority
between dominant and dominated. From the sixteenth century on, this
principle has proven to be the most effective and long-lasting instrument of
universal social domination, since the much older principle—gender or intersexual domination—was encroached upon by the inferior/superior racial
classifications. So the conquered and dominated peoples were situated in a
natural position of inferiority and, as a result, their phenotypic traits as well
as their cultural features were considered inferior.6 In this way, race became
the fundamental criterion for the distribution of the world population into
ranks, places, and roles in the new society’s structure of power.
Capitalism, the New Structure for the Control of Labor

In the historical process of the constitution of America, all forms of control
and exploitation of labor and production, as well as the control of appropriation and distribution of products, revolved around the capital-salary
relation and the world market. These forms of labor control included slavery, serfdom, petty-commodity production, reciprocity, and wages. In such
an assemblage, each form of labor control was no mere extension of its
historical antecedents. All of these forms of labor were historically and
sociologically new: in the first place, because they were deliberately established and organized to produce commodities for the world market; in
the second place, because they did not merely exist simultaneously in the
same space/time, but each one of them was also articulated to capital and its
market. Thus they configured a new global model of labor control, and in
turn a fundamental element of a new model of power to which they were
historically structurally dependent. That is to say, the place and function,
and therefore the historical movement, of all forms of labor as subordinated
points of a totality belonged to the new model of power, in spite of their
heterogeneous specific traits and their discontinuous relations with that totality. In the third place, and as a consequence, each form of labor developed
into new traits and historical-structural configurations.
Insofar as that structure of control of labor, resources, and products
consisted of the joint articulation of all the respective historically known
forms, a global model of control of work was established for the first time
in known history. And while it was constituted around and in the service
of capital, its configuration as a whole was established with a capitalist
character as well. Thus emerged a new, original, and singular structure

536

Nepantla

of relations of production in the historical experience of the world: world
capitalism.
Coloniality of Power and Global Capitalism

The new historical identities produced around the foundation of the idea of
race in the new global structure of the control of labor were associated with
social roles and geohistorical places. In this way, both race and the division
of labor remained structurally linked and mutually reinforcing, in spite of
the fact that neither of them were necessarily dependent on the other in
order to exist or change.
In this way, a systematic racial division of labor was imposed. In
the Hispanic region, the Crown of Castilla decided early on to end the enslavement of the Indians in order to prevent their total extermination. They
were instead confined to serfdom. For those that lived in communities, the
ancient practice of reciprocity—the exchange of labor force and labor without a market—was allowed as a way of reproducing its labor force as serfs.
In some cases, the Indian nobility, a reduced minority, was exempted from
serfdom and received special treatment owing to their roles as intermediaries with the dominant race. They were also permitted to participate
in some of the activities of the nonnoble Spanish. However, blacks were
reduced to slavery. As the dominant race, Spanish and Portuguese whites
could receive wages, be independent merchants, independent artisans, or
independent farmers—in short, independent producers of commodities.
Nevertheless, only nobles could participate in the high-to-midrange positions in the military and civil colonial administration.
Beginning in the eighteenth century, in Hispanic America an extensive and important social stratum of mestizos (born of Spanish men and
Indian women) began to participate in the same offices and activities as
nonnoble Iberians. To a lesser extent, and above all in activities of service
or those that required a specialized talent (music, for example), the more
“whitened” among the mestizos of black women and Spanish or Portuguese
had an opportunity to work. But they were late in legitimizing their new
roles, since their mothers were slaves. This racist distribution of labor in
the interior of colonial/modern capitalism was maintained throughout the
colonial period.
In the course of the worldwide expansion of colonial domination
on the part of the same dominant race (or, from the eighteenth century
onward, Europeans), the same criteria of social classification were imposed on all of the world population. As a result, new historical and social

537

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

identities were produced: yellows and olives were added to whites, Indians,
blacks, and mestizos. The racist distribution of new social identities was
combined, as had been done so successfully in Anglo-America, with a racist
distribution of labor and the forms of exploitation of colonial capitalism.
This was, above all, through a quasi-exclusive association of whiteness with
wages and, of course, with the high-order positions in the colonial administration. Thus each form of labor control was associated with a particular
race. Consequently, the control of a specific form of labor could be, at the
same time, the control of a specific group of dominated people. A new technology of domination/exploitation, in this case race/labor, was articulated
in such a way that the two elements appeared naturally associated. Until
now, this strategy has been exceptionally successful.
Coloniality and the Eurocentrification of World Capitalism

The privileged positions conquered by the dominant whites for the control of gold, silver, and other commodities produced by the unpaid labor
of Indians, blacks, and mestizos (coupled with an advantageous location
in the slope of the Atlantic through which, necessarily, the traffic of these
commodities for the world market had to pass) granted whites a decisive
advantage to compete for the control of worldwide commercial traffic.
The progressive monetization of the world market that the precious metals
from America stimulated and allowed, as well as the control of such large
resources, made possible the control of the vast preexisting web of commercial exchange that included, above all, China, India, Ceylon, Egypt,
Syria—the future Far and Middle East. The monetization of labor also
made it possible to concentrate the control of commercial capital, labor, and
means of production in the whole world market.
The control of global commercial traffic by dominant groups headquartered in the Atlantic zones propelled in those places a new process of
urbanization based on the expansion of commercial traffic between them,
and, consequently, the formation of regional markets increasingly integrated and monetarized due to the flow of precious metals originating in
America. A historically new region was constituted as a new geocultural
id-entity: Europe—more specifically, Western Europe.7 A new geocultural
identity emerged as the central site for the control of the world market. The
hegemony of the coasts of the Mediterranean and the Iberian peninsula
was displaced toward the northwest Atlantic coast in the same historical
moment.

538

Nepantla

The condition Europe found itself in as the central site of the new
world market cannot explain by itself alone why Europe also became, until
the nineteenth century and virtually until the worldwide crisis of 1870,
the central site of the process of the commodification of the labor force,
while all the rest of the regions and populations colonized and incorporated
into the new world market under European dominion basically remained
under nonwaged relations of labor. And in non-European regions, wage
labor was concentrated almost exclusively among whites. Of course, the
entire production of such a division of labor was articulated in a chain of
transference of value and profits whose control corresponded to Western
Europe.
There is nothing in the social relation of capital itself, or in the
mechanisms of the world market in general, that implies the historical
necessity of European concentration first (either in Europe or elsewhere) of
waged labor and later (over precisely the same base) of the concentration
of industrial production for more than two centuries. As events after 1870
demonstrated, Western European control of wage labor in any sector of the
world’s population would have been perfectly feasible, and probably more
profitable for Western Europe. The explanation ought to lie, then, in some
other aspect of history itself.
The fact is that from the very beginning of the colonization of
America, Europeans associated nonpaid or nonwaged labor with the dominated races because they were “inferior” races. The vast genocide of the
Indians in the first decades of colonization was not caused principally by
the violence of the conquest nor by the plagues the conquistadors brought,
but took place because so many American Indians were used as disposable
manual labor and forced to work until death. The elimination of this colonial practice did not end until the defeat of the encomenderos in the middle of
the sixteenth century. The subsequent Iberian colonialism involved a new
politics of population reorganization, a reorganization of the Indians and
their relations with the colonizers. But this did not advance American Indians as free and waged laborers. From then on, they were assigned the status
of unpaid serfs. The serfdom of the American Indians could not, however,
be compared with feudal serfdom in Europe, since it included neither the
supposed protection of a feudal lord nor, necessarily, the possession of a
piece of land to cultivate instead of wages. Before independence, the Indian
labor force of serfs reproduced itself in the communities, but more than
one hundred years after independence, a large part of the Indian serfs was
still obliged to reproduce the labor force on its own.8 The other form of

539

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

unwaged or, simply put, unpaid labor, slavery, was assigned exclusively to
the “black” population brought from Africa.
The racial classification of the population and the early association of the new racial identities of the colonized with the forms of control
of unpaid, unwaged labor developed among the Europeans the singular
perception that paid labor was the whites’ privilege. The racial inferiority
of the colonized implied that they were not worthy of wages. They were
naturally obliged to work for the profit of their owners. It is not difficult
to find, to this very day, this attitude spread out among the white property
owners of any place in the world. Furthermore, the lower wages “inferior
races” receive in the present capitalist centers for the same work as done by
whites cannot be explained as detached from the racist social classification
of the world’s population—in other words, as detached from the global
capitalist coloniality of power.
The control of labor in the new model of global power was constituted thus, articulating all historical forms of labor control around the
capitalist wage-labor relation. This articulation was constitutively colonial,
based on first the assignment of all forms of unpaid labor to colonial races
(originally American Indians, blacks, and, in a more complex way, mestizos) in America and, later on, to the remaining colonized races in the rest
of the world, olives and yellows. Second, labor was controlled through the
assignment of salaried labor to the colonizing whites.
Coloniality of labor control determined the geographic distribution of each one of the integrated forms of labor control in global capitalism.
In other words, it determined the social geography of capitalism: capital, as
a social formation for control of wage labor, was the axis around which all
remaining forms of labor control, resources, and products were articulated.
But, at the same time, capital’s specific social configuration was geographically and socially concentrated in Europe and, above all, among Europeans
in the whole world of capitalism. Through these measures, Europe and
the European constituted themselves as the center of the capitalist world
economy.
When Raúl Prebisch coined the celebrated image of center and
periphery to describe the configuration of global capitalism since the end
of World War II, he underscored, with or without being aware of it, the
nucleus of the historical model for the control of labor, resources, and products that shaped the central part of the new global model of power, starting
with America as a player in the new world economy.9 Global capitalism
was, from then on, colonial/modern and Eurocentered. Without a clear

540

Nepantla

understanding of those specific historical characteristics of capitalism, the
concept of a “modern world-system” itself, developed principally by Immanuel Wallerstein (1974–89; Hopkins and Wallerstein 1982) but based
on Prebisch and on the Marxian concept of world capitalism, cannot be
properly or completely understood.
The New Model of World Power and the New
World Intersubjectivity

As the center of global capitalism, Europe not only had control of the
world market, but it was also able to impose its colonial dominance over
all the regions and populations of the planet, incorporating them into its
world-system and its specific model of power. For such regions and populations, this model of power involved a process of historical reidentification;
from Europe such regions and populations were attributed new geocultural
identities. In that way, after America and Europe were established, Africa,
Asia, and eventually Oceania followed suit. In the production of these new
identities, the coloniality of the new model of power was, without a doubt,
one of the most active determinations. But the forms and levels of political
and cultural development, and more specifically intellectual development,
played a role of utmost importance in each case. Without these factors, the
category “Orient” would not have been elaborated as the only one with
sufficient dignity to be the other to the “Occident,” although by definition
inferior, without some equivalent to “Indians” or “blacks” being coined.10
But this omission itself puts in the open the fact that those other factors also
acted within the racist model of universal social classification of the world
population.
The incorporation of such diverse and heterogeneous cultural histories into a single world dominated by Europe signified a cultural and
intellectual intersubjective configuration equivalent to the articulation of
all forms of labor control around capital, a configuration that established
world capitalism. In effect, all of the experiences, histories, resources, and
cultural products ended up in one global cultural order revolving around
European or Western hegemony. Europe’s hegemony over the new model
of global power concentrated all forms of the control of subjectivity, culture, and especially knowledge and the production of knowledge under its
hegemony.
During that process, the colonizers exercised diverse operations
that brought about the configuration of a new universe of intersubjective
relations of domination between Europe and the Europeans and the rest of

541

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

the regions and peoples of the world, to whom new geocultural identities
were being attributed in that process. In the first place, they expropriated the
cultural discoveries of the colonized peoples most apt for the development
of capitalism to the profit of the European center. Second, they repressed as
much as possible the colonized forms of knowledge production, the models
of the production of meaning, their symbolic universe, the model of expression and of objectification and subjectivity. As is well known, repression in
this field was most violent, profound, and long lasting among the Indians of
Ibero-America, who were condemned to be an illiterate peasant subculture
stripped of their objectified intellectual legacy. Something equivalent happened in Africa. Doubtless, the repression was much less intense in Asia,
where an important part of the history of the intellectual written legacy has
been preserved. And it was precisely such epistemic suppression that gave
origin to the category “Orient.” Third, in different ways in each case, they
forced the colonized to learn the dominant culture in any way that would be
useful to the reproduction of domination, whether in the field of technology
and material activity or subjectivity, especially Judeo-Christian religiosity.
All of those turbulent processes involved a long period of the colonization of
cognitive perspectives, modes of producing and giving meaning, the results
of material existence, the imaginary, the universe of intersubjective relations
with the world: in short, the culture.11
The success of Western Europe in becoming the center of the
modern world-system, according to Wallerstein’s suitable formulation, developed within the Europeans a trait common to all colonial dominators
and imperialists, ethnocentrism. But in the case of Western Europe, that
trait had a peculiar formulation and justification: the racial classification of
the world population after the colonization of America. The association of
colonial ethnocentrism and universal racial classification helps to explain
why Europeans came to feel not only superior to all the other peoples of
the world, but, in particular, naturally superior. This historical instance is
expressed through a mental operation of fundamental importance for the
entire model of global power, but above all with respect to the intersubjective relations that were hegemonic, and especially for its perspective on
knowledge: the Europeans generated a new temporal perspective of history
and relocated the colonized population, along with their respective histories
and cultures, in the past of a historical trajectory whose culmination was
Europe (Mignolo 1995; Blaut 1993; Lander 1997). Notably, however, they
were not in the same line of continuity as the Europeans, but in another,

542

Nepantla

naturally different category. The colonized peoples were inferior races and
in that manner were the past vis-à-vis the Europeans.
That perspective imagined modernity and rationality as exclusively European products and experiences. From this point of view, intersubjective and cultural relations between Western Europe and the rest of the
world were codified in a strong play of new categories: East-West, primitivecivilized, magic/mythic-scientific, irrational-rational, traditional-modern
—Europe and not Europe. Even so, the only category with the honor of
being recognized as the other of Europe and the West was “Orient”—not
the Indians of America and not the blacks of Africa, who were simply
“primitive.” For underneath that codification of relations between Europeans and non-Europeans, race is, without doubt, the basic category.12 This
binary, dualist perspective on knowledge, particular to Eurocentrism, was
imposed as globally hegemonic in the same course as the expansion of European colonial dominance over the world.
It would not be possible to explain the elaboration of Eurocentrism
as the hegemonic perspective of knowledge otherwise. The Eurocentric
version is based on two principal founding myths: first, the idea of the
history of human civilization as a trajectory that departed from a state of
nature and culminated in Europe; second, a view of the differences between
Europe and non-Europe as natural (racial) differences and not consequences
of a history of power. Both myths can be unequivocally recognized in the
foundations of evolutionism and dualism, two of the nuclear elements of
Eurocentrism.
The Question of Modernity

I do not propose to enter here into a thorough discussion of the question
of modernity and its Eurocentric version. In particular, I will not lengthen
this piece with a discussion of the modernity-postmodernity debate and its
vast bibliography. But it is pertinent for the goals of this essay, especially for
the following section, to raise some questions.13
The fact that Western Europeans will imagine themselves to be
the culmination of a civilizing trajectory from a state of nature leads them
also to think of themselves as the moderns of humanity and its history, that
is, as the new, and at the same time, most advanced of the species. But since
they attribute the rest of the species to a category by nature inferior and
consequently anterior, belonging to the past in the progress of the species,
the Europeans imagine themselves as the exclusive bearers, creators, and
protagonists of that modernity. What is notable about this is not that the

543

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

Europeans imagined and thought of themselves and the rest of the species
in that way—something not exclusive to Europeans—but the fact that they
were capable of spreading and establishing that historical perspective as
hegemonic within the new intersubjective universe of the global model of
power.
Of course, the intellectual resistance to that historical perspective
was not long in emerging. In Latin America, from the end of the nineteenth
century and above all in the twentieth century, especially after World War
II, it happened in connection with the development-underdevelopment
debate. That debate was dominated for a long time by the so-called theory
of modernization.14 One of the arguments most frequently used, from
opposing angles, was to affirm that modernization does not necessarily
imply the westernization of non-European societies and cultures, but that
modernity is a phenomenon of all cultures, not just of Europe or the West.
If the concept of modernity only, or fundamentally, refers to the
ideas of newness, the advanced, the rational-scientific, the secular (which
are the ideas normally associated with it), then there is no doubt that one
must admit that it is a phenomenon possible in all cultures and historical
epochs. With all their respective particularities and differences, all the socalled high cultures (China, India, Egypt, Greece, Maya-Aztec, Tawantinsuyo) prior to the current world-system unequivocally exhibit signs of that
modernity, including rational science and the secularization of thought. In
truth, it would be almost ridiculous at these levels of historical research to
attribute to non-European cultures a mythic-magical mentality, for example, as a defining trait in opposition to rationality and science as characteristics of Europe. Therefore, apart from their symbolic contents, cities,
temples, palaces, pyramids or monumental cities (such as Machu Picchu
or Borobudur), irrigation, large thoroughfares, technologies, metallurgy,
mathematics, calendars, writing, philosophy, histories, armies, and wars
clearly demonstrate the scientific development in each one of the high cultures that took place long before the formation of Europe as a new id-entity.
The most that one can really say is that the present period has gone further
in scientific and technological developments and has made major discoveries and achievements under Europe’s hegemonic role and, more generally,
under Western hegemony.
The defenders of the European patent on modernity are accustomed to appeal to the cultural history of the ancient Greco-Roman world
and to the world of the Mediterranean prior to the colonization of America
in order to legitimize their claim on the exclusivity of its patent. What is

544

Nepantla

curious about this argument is, first, that it obscures the fact that the truly
advanced part of the Mediterranean world was Islamo-Judaic. Second, it
was that world that maintained the Greco-Roman cultural heritage, cities,
commerce, agricultural trade, mining, textile industry, philosophy, and history, while the future Western Europe was being dominated by feudalism
and cultural obscurantism. Third, very probably, the commodification of
the labor force—the capital-wage relation—emerged precisely in that area,
and its development expanded north toward the future Europe. Fourth,
starting only with the defeat of Islam and the later displacement by America of Islam’s hegemony over the world market north to Europe did the
center of cultural activity also begin to be displaced to that new region.
Because of this, the new geographic perspective of history and culture, elaborated and imposed as globally hegemonic, implies a new geography of
power. The idea of Occident-Orient itself is belated and starts with British
hegemony. Or is it still necessary to recall that the prime meridian crosses
London and not Seville or Venice?15
In this sense, the Eurocentric pretension to be the exclusive producer and protagonist of modernity—because of which all modernization
of non-European populations, is, therefore, a Europeanization—is an ethnocentric pretension and, in the long run, provincial. However, if it is
accepted that the concept of modernity refers solely to rationality, science,
technology, and so on, the question that we would be posing to historical
experience would not be different than the one proposed by European ethnocentrism. The debate would consist just in the dispute for the originality
and exclusivity of the ownership of the phenomenon thus called modernity, and consequently everything would remain in the same terrain and
according to the same perspective of Eurocentrism.
There is, however, a set of elements that point to a different concept
of modernity that gives an account of a historical process specific to the
current world-system. The previous references and traits of the concept
of modernity are not absent, obviously. But they belong to a universe of
social relations, both in its material and intersubjective dimensions, whose
central question and, consequently its central field conflict, is human social
liberation as a historical interest of society. In this article, I will limit myself
to advancing, in a brief and schematic manner, some propositions to clarify
these issues.16
In the first place, the current model of global power is the first effectively global one in world history in several specific senses. First, it is the
first where in each sphere of social existence all historically known forms

545

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

of control of respective social relations are articulated, configuring in each
area only one structure with systematic relations between its components
and, by the same means, its whole. Second, it is the first model where each
structure of each sphere of social existence is under the hegemony of an institution produced within the process of formation and development of that
same model of power. Thus, in the control of labor and its resources and
products, it is the capitalist enterprise; in the control of sex and its resources
and products, the bourgeois family; in the control of authority and its resources and products, the nation-state; in the control of intersubjectivity,
Eurocentrism.17 Third, each one of those institutions exists in a relation of
interdependence with each one of the others. Therefore, the model of power
is configured as a system.18 Fourth, finally, this model of global power is the
first that covers the entire planet’s population.
In this specific sense, humanity in its totality constitutes today the
first historically known global world-system, not only a world, as were the
Chinese, Hindu, Egyptian, Hellenic-Roman, Aztec-Mayan, or Tawantinsuyan. None of those worlds had in common but one colonial/imperial
dominant. And though it is a sort of common sense in the Eurocentric vision, it is by no means certain that all the peoples incorporated into one of
those worlds would have had in common a basic perspective on the relation
between that which is human and the rest of the universe. The colonial
dominators of each one of those worlds did not have the conditions, nor,
probably, the interest for homogenizing the basic forms of social existence
for all the populations under their dominion. On the other hand, the modern world-system that began to form with the colonization of America,
has in common three central elements that affect the quotidian life of the
totality of the global population: the coloniality of power, capitalism, and
Eurocentrism. Of course, this model of power, or any other, can mean
that historical-structural heterogeneity has been eradicated within its dominions. Its globality means that there is a basic level of common social
practices and a central sphere of common value orientation for the entire
world. Consequently, the hegemonic institutions of each province of social existence are universal to the population of the world as intersubjective
models, as illustrated by the nation-state, the bourgeois family, the capitalist
corporation, and the Eurocentric rationality.
Therefore, whatever it may be that the term modernity names today, it involves the totality of the global population and all the history of
the last five hundred years, all the worlds or former worlds articulated in
the global model of power, each differentiated or differentiable segment

546

Nepantla

constituted together with (as part of) the historical redefinition or reconstitution of each segment for its incorporation to the new and common model
of global power. Therefore, it is also an articulation of many rationalities.
However, since the model depicts a new and different history with specific
experiences, the questions that this history raises cannot be investigated,
much less contested, within the Eurocentric concept of modernity. For this
reason, to say that modernity is a purely European phenomenon or one that
occurs in all cultures would now have an impossible meaning. Modernity
is about something new and different, something specific to this model of
global power. If one must preserve the name, one must also mean another
modernity.
The central question that interests us here is the following: What is
really new with respect to modernity? And by this I mean not only what develops and redefines experiences, tendencies, and processes of other worlds,
but, also, what was produced in the present model of global power’s own
history. Enrique Dussel (1995) has proposed the category “transmodernity”
as an alternative to the Eurocentric pretension that Europe is the original
producer of modernity. According to this proposal, the constitution of the
individual differentiated ego is what began with American colonization
and is the mark of modernity, but it has a place not only in Europe but also
in the entire world that American settlement configured. Dussel hits the
mark in refusing one of the favorite myths of Eurocentrism. But it is not
certain that the individual, differentiated ego is a phenomenon belonging
exclusively to the period initiated with America. There is, of course, an
umbilical relation between the historical processes that were generated and
that began with America and the changes in subjectivity or, better said,
the intersubjectivity of all the peoples that were integrated into the new
model of global power. And those changes brought the constitution of a
new intersubjectivity, not only individually, but collectively as well. This is,
therefore, a new phenomenon that entered in history with America and in
that sense is part of modernity. But whatever they might have been, those
changes were not constituted from the individual (nor from the collective)
subjectivity of a preexisting world. Or, to use an old image, those changes
are born not like Pallas Athena from the head of Zeus, but are rather the
subjective or intersubjective expression of what the peoples of the world are
doing at that moment.
From this perspective, it is necessary to admit that the colonization
of America, its immediate consequences in the global market, and the
formation of a new model of global power are a truly tremendous historical

547

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

change and that they affect not only Europe but the entire globe. This is
not a change in a known world that merely altered some of its traits. It is a
change in the world as such. This is, without doubt, the founding element
of the new subjectivity: the perception of historical change. It is this element
that unleashed the process of the constitution of a new perspective about
time and about history. The perception of change brings about a new idea
of the future, since it is the only territory of time where the changes can
occur. The future is an open temporal territory. Time can be new, and
so not merely the extension of the past. And in this way history can be
perceived now not only as something that happens, something natural or
produced by divine decisions or mysteries as destiny, but also as something
that can be produced by the action of people, by their calculations, their
intention, their decisions, and therefore as something that can be designed,
and consequently, can have meaning (Quijano 1988a).
With America an entire universe of new material relations and
intersubjectivities was initiated. It is pertinent to admit that the concept of
modernity does not refer only to what happens with subjectivity (despite all
the tremendous importance of that process), to the individual ego, to a new
universe of intersubjective relations between individuals and the peoples
integrated into the new world-system and its specific model of global power.
The concept of modernity accounts equally for the changes in the material
dimensions of social relations (i.e., world capitalism, coloniality of power).
That is to say, the changes that occur on all levels of social existence, and
therefore happen to their individual members, are the same in their material
and intersubjective dimensions. And since “modernity” is about processes
that were initiated with the emergence of America, of a new model of global
power (the first world-system), and of the integration of all the peoples of
the globe in that process, it is also essential to admit that it is about an entire
historical period. In other words, starting with America, a new space/time
was constituted materially and subjectively: this is what the concept of
modernity names.
Nevertheless, it was decisive for the process of modernity that the
hegemonic center of the world would be localized in the north-central
zones of Western Europe. That process helps to explain why the center of
intellectual conceptualization will be localized in Western Europe as well,
and why that version acquired global hegemony. The same process helps,
equally, to explain the coloniality of power that will play a part of the first
order in the Eurocentric elaboration of modernity. This last point is not very
difficult to perceive if we bear in mind what has been shown just above:

548

Nepantla

the way in which the coloniality of power is tied up to the concentration in
Europe of capital, wages, the market of capital, and finally, the society and
culture associated with those determinations. In this sense, modernity was
also colonial from its point of departure. This helps explain why the global
process of modernization had a much more direct and immediate impact
in Europe.
In fact, as experience and as idea, the new social practices involved
in the model of global, capitalist power, the concentration of capital and
wages, the new market for capital associated with the new perspective on
time and on history, and the centrality of the question of historical change
in that perspective require on one hand the desacralization of hierarchies
and authorities, both in the material dimension of social relations and in
its intersubjectivity, and on the other hand the desacralization, change,
or dismantlement of the corresponding structures and institutions. The
new individuation of subjectivity only acquires its meaning in this context,
because from it stems the necessity for an individual inner forum in order
to think, doubt, and choose. In short, the individual liberty against fixed
social ascriptions and, consequently, the necessity for social equality among
individuals.
Capitalist determinations, however, required also (and in the same
historical movement) that material and intersubjective social processes
could not have a place but within social relations of exploitation and domination. For the controllers of power, the control of capital and the market
were and are what decides the ends, the means, and the limits of the process.
The market is the foundation but also the limit of possible social equality
among people. For those exploited by capital, and in general those dominated by the model of power, modernity generates a horizon of liberation
for people of every relation, structure, or institution linked to domination
and exploitation, but also the social conditions in order to advance toward
the direction of that horizon. Modernity is, then, also a question of conflicting social interests. One of these interests is the continued democratization
of social existence. In this sense, every concept of modernity is necessarily
ambiguous and contradictory (Quijano 1998a, 2000b).
It is precisely in the contradictions and ambiguities of modernity that the history of these processes so clearly differentiates Western
Europe from the rest of the world, as it is clear in Latin America. In Western Europe, the concentration of the wage-capital relation is the principal
axis of the tendencies for social classification and the correspondent structure of power. Economic structures and social classification underlay the

549

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

confrontations with the old order, with empire, with the papacy during the
period of so-called competitive capital. These conflicts made it possible for
nondominant sectors of capital as well as the exploited to find better conditions to negotiate their place in the structure of power and in selling their
labor power. It also opens the conditions for a specifically bourgeois secularization of culture and subjectivity. Liberalism is one of the clear expressions
of this material and subjective context of Western European society. However, in the rest of the world, and in Latin America in particular, the most
extended forms of labor control are nonwaged (although for the benefit of
global capital), which implies that the relations of exploitation and domination have a colonial character. Political independence, at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, is accompanied in the majority of the new countries
by the stagnation and recession of the most advanced sectors of the capitalist economy and therefore by the strengthening of the colonial character
of social and political domination under formally independent states. The
Eurocentrification of colonial/modern capitalism was in this sense decisive
for the different destinies of the process of modernity between Europe and
the rest of the world (Quijano 1994).
Coloniality of Power and Eurocentrism

The intellectual conceptualization of the process of modernity produced a
perspective of knowledge and a mode of producing knowledge that gives
a very tight account of the character of the global model of power: colonial/modern, capitalist, and Eurocentered. This perspective and concrete
mode of producing knowledge is Eurocentrism.19
Eurocentrism is, as used here, the name of a perspective of knowledge whose systematic formation began in Western Europe before the
middle of the seventeenth century, although some of its roots are, without doubt, much older. In the following centuries this perspective was
made globally hegemonic, traveling the same course as the dominion of the
European bourgeois class. Its constitution was associated with the specific
bourgeois secularization of European thought and with the experiences and
necessities of the global model of capitalist (colonial/modern) and Eurocentered power established since the colonization of America.
This category of Eurocentrism does not involve all of the knowledge of history of all of Europe or Western Europe in particular. It does
not refer to all the modes of knowledge of all Europeans and all epochs. It
is instead a specific rationality or perspective of knowledge that was made
globally hegemonic, colonizing and overcoming other previous or different

550

Nepantla

conceptual formations and their respective concrete knowledges, as much
in Europe as in the rest of the world. In the framework of this essay I propose to discuss some of these issues more directly related to the experience
of Latin America, but, obviously, they do not refer only to Latin America.
Capital and Capitalism

First, the theory of history as a linear sequence of universally valid events
needs to be reopened in relation to America as a major question in the
social-scientific debate. More so when such a concept of history is applied
to labor and the control of labor conceptualized as modes of production in
the sequence precapitalism-capitalism. From the Eurocentric point of view,
reciprocity, slavery, serfdom, and independent commodity production are
all perceived as a historical sequence prior to commodification of the labor
force. They are precapital. And they are considered not only different, but
radically incompatible with capital. The fact is, however, that in America
they did not emerge in a linear historical sequence; none of them was a
mere extension of the old precapitalist form, nor were they incompatible
with capital.
Slavery, in America, was deliberately established and organized
as a commodity in order to produce goods for the world market and to
serve the purposes and needs of capitalism. Likewise, the serfdom imposed
on Indians, including the redefinition of the institutions of reciprocity, was
organized in order to serve the same ends: to produce merchandise for the
global market. Independent commodity production was established and
expanded for the same purposes. This means that all the forms of labor
and control of labor were not only simultaneously performed in America,
but they were also articulated around the axis of capital and the global
market. Consequently, all of these forms of labor were part of a new model
of organization and labor control. Together these forms of labor configured
a new economic system: capitalism.
Capital, as a social relation based on the commodification of the
labor force, was probably born in some moment around the eleventh or
twelfth century in some place in the southern regions of the Iberian and/or
Italian peninsulas and, for known reasons, in the Islamic world.20 Capital is
thus much older than America. But before the emergence of America, it was
nowhere structurally articulated with all the other forms of organization
and control of the labor force and labor, nor was it predominant over any
of them. Only with America could capital consolidate and obtain global
predominance, becoming precisely the axis around which all forms of labor

551

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

were articulated to satisfy the ends of the world market, configuring a
new pattern of global control on labor, its resources, and products: world
capitalism. Therefore, capitalism as a system of relations of production,
that is, as the heterogeneous linking of all forms of control on labor and its
products under the dominance of capital, was constituted in history only
with the emergence of America. Beginning with that historical moment,
capital has always existed, and continues to exist to this day, as the central
axis of capitalism. Never has capitalism been predominant in some other
way, on a global and worldwide scale, and in all probability it would not
have been able to develop otherwise.
Evolutionism and Dualism

Parallel to the historical relations between capital and precapital, a similar
set of ideas was elaborated around the spatial relations between Europe and
non-Europe. As I have already mentioned, the foundational myth of the
Eurocentric version of modernity is the idea of the state of nature as the point
of departure for the civilized course of history whose culmination is European or Western civilization. From this myth originated the specifically
Eurocentric evolutionist perspective of linear and unidirectional movement
and changes in human history. Interestingly enough, this myth was associated with the racial and spatial classification of the world’s population. This
association produced the paradoxical amalgam of evolution and dualism,
a vision that becomes meaningful only as an expression of the exacerbated
ethnocentrism of the recently constituted Europe; by its central and dominant place in global, colonial/modern capitalism; by the new validity of the
mystified ideas of humanity and progress, dear products of the Enlightenment; and by the validity of the idea of race as the basic criterion for a
universal social classification of the world’s population.
The historical process is, however, very different. To start with, in
the moment that the Iberians conquered, named, and colonized America
(whose northern region, North America, would be colonized by the British
a century later), they found a great number of different peoples, each with
its own history, language, discoveries and cultural products, memory and
identity. The most developed and sophisticated of them were the Aztecs,
Mayas, Chimus, Aymaras, Incas, Chibchas, and so on. Three hundred years
later, all of them had become merged into a single identity: Indians. This
new identity was racial, colonial, and negative. The same happened with
the peoples forcefully brought from Africa as slaves: Ashantis, Yorubas,

552

Nepantla

Zulus, Congos, Bacongos, and others. In the span of three hundred years,
all of them were Negroes or blacks.
This resultant from the history of colonial power had, in terms
of the colonial perception, two decisive implications. The first is obvious:
peoples were dispossessed of their own and singular historical identities.
The second is perhaps less obvious, but no less decisive: their new racial
identity, colonial and negative, involved the plundering of their place in the
history of the cultural production of humanity. From then on, there were
inferior races, capable only of producing inferior cultures. The new identity
also involved their relocation in the historical time constituted with America
first and with Europe later: from then on they were the past. In other words,
the model of power based on coloniality also involved a cognitive model, a
new perspective of knowledge within which non-Europe was the past, and
because of that inferior, if not always primitive.
At the other hand, America was the first modern and global geocultural identity. Europe was the second and was constituted as a consequence of America, not the inverse. The constitution of Europe as a new
historic entity/identity was made possible, in the first place, through the
free labor of the American Indians, blacks, and mestizos, with their advanced technology in mining and agriculture, and with their products such
as gold, silver, potatoes, tomatoes, and tobacco (Viola and Margolis 1991).
It was on this foundation that a region was configured as the site of control
of the Atlantic routes, which became in turn, and for this very reason, the
decisive routes of the world market. This region did not delay in emerging
as . . . Europe. So Europe and America mutually produced themselves as
the historical and the first two new geocultural identities of the modern
world.
However, the Europeans persuaded themselves, from the middle
of the seventeenth century, but above all during the eighteenth century, that
in some way they had autoproduced themselves as a civilization, at the margin of history initiated with America, culminating an independent line that
began with Greece as the only original source. Furthermore, they concluded
that they were naturally (i.e., racially) superior to the rest of the world, since
they had conquered everyone and had imposed their dominance on them.
The confrontation between the historical experience and the
Eurocentric perspective on knowledge makes it possible to underline
some of the more important elements of Eurocentrism: (a) a peculiar
articulation between dualism (capital-precapital, Europe–non-Europe,
primitive-civilized, traditional-modern, etc.) and a linear, one-directional

553

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

evolutionism from some state of nature to modern European society; (b) the
naturalization of the cultural differences between human groups by means
of their codification with the idea of race; and (c) the distorted-temporal
relocation of all those differences by relocating non-Europeans in the past.
All these intellectual operations are clearly interdependent, and they could
not have been cultivated and developed without the coloniality of power.
Homogeneity/Continuity and Heterogeneity/Discontinuity

As it is visible now, the radical crisis that the Eurocentric perspective of
knowledge is undergoing opens up a field full of questions. I will discuss
two of them. First, the idea of historical change as a process or moment in
which an entity or unity is transformed in a continuous, homogenic and
complete way into something else and absolutely abandoning the scene of
history. This process allows for another equivalent entity to occupy the
space, and in such a way that everything continues in a sequential chain.
Otherwise, the idea of history as a linear and one-directional evolution
would not have meaning or place. Second, such an idea implies that each
differentiated unity (for example, “economy/society,” or “mode of production” in the case of labor control of capital or slavery, or “race/civilization”
in the case of human groups) subjected to the historical change is a homogeneous entity/identity. Even more, each of them are perceived as structures
of homogeneous elements related in a continuous and systemic (which is
distinct from systematic) manner.
Historical experience shows, however, that global capitalism is far
from being an homogeneous and continuous totality. On the contrary, as the
historical experience of America demonstrates, the pattern of global power
that is known as capitalism is, fundamentally, a structure of heterogeneous
elements as much in terms of forms of control of labor-resources-products
(or relations of production) as in terms of the peoples and histories articulated in it. Consequently, such elements are connected between themselves
and with the totality by means that are heterogeneous and discontinuous,
including conflict. And each of these elements is configured in the same way.
So, any relation of production (as any other entity or unity) is in
itself a heterogeneous structure, especially capital, since all the stages and
historic forms of the production of value and the appropriation of surplus
value are simultaneously active and work together in a complex network
for transferring value and surplus value. Take, for example, primitive accumulation, absolute and relative surplus value, extensive or intensive—or in
other nomenclature, competitive—capital, monopoly capital, transnational

554

Nepantla

or global capital, or pre-Fordist capital, Fordist capital, manual or laborintensive capital, capital-intensive value, information-intensive value, and
so on. The same logic was at work with respect to race, since so many diverse and heterogeneous peoples, with heterogeneous histories and historic
tendencies of movement and change, were united under only one racial
heading, such as American “Indians” or “blacks.”
The heterogeneity that I am talking about is not simply structural,
based in the relations between contemporaneous elements. Since diverse and
heterogeneous histories of this type were articulated in a single structure of
power, it is pertinent to acknowledge the historical-structural character of
this heterogeneity. Consequently, the process of change of capitalist totality
cannot, in any way, be a homogeneous and continuous transformation,
either of the entire system or of each one of its constituent parts. Nor
could that totality completely and homogeneously disappear from the scene
of history and be replaced by any equivalent. Historical change cannot
be linear, one-directional, sequential, or total. The system, or the specific
pattern of structural articulation, could be dismantled; however, each one
or some of its elements can and will have to be rearticulated in some other
structural model, as it happened with some components of the precolonial
model of power in, for instance, Tawantinsuyu.21
The New Dualism

Finally, for the sake of my argument, it is pertinent to revisit the question of
the relations between the body and the nonbody in the Eurocentric perspective, because of its importance both in the Eurocentric mode of producing
knowledge and to the fact that modern dualism has close relations with
race and gender. My aim here is to connect a well-known problematic with
the coloniality of power.
The differentiation between body and nonbody in human experience is virtually universal in the history of humanity. It is also common
to all historically known “cultures” or “civilizations,” part of the copresence of both as unseparable dimensions of humanness. The process of the
separation of these two elements (body and nonbody) of the human being
is part of the long history of the Christian world founded on the idea of
the primacy of the soul above the body. But the history of this point in
particular shows a long and unresolved ambivalence of Christian theology.
The soul is the privileged object of salvation, but in the end, the body is
resurrected as the culmination of salvation. The primacy of the soul was
emphasized, perhaps exasperated, during the culture of the repression of

555

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

Christianity, as resulted from the conflicts with Muslims and Jews in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, during the peak of the Inquisition. And
because the body was the basic object of repression, the soul could appear
almost separated from the intersubjective relations at the interior of the
Christian world. But this issue was not systematically theorized, discussed
and elaborated until Descartes’s writing (1963–67) culminated the process
of bourgeois secularization of Christian thought.22
With Descartes the mutation of the ancient dualist approach to
the body and the nonbody took place.23 What was a permanent copresence
of both elements in each stage of the human being, with Descartes came a
radical separation between reason/subject and body. Reason was not only a
secularization of the idea of the soul in the theological sense, but a mutation into a new entity, the reason/subject, the only entity capable of rational
knowledge. The body was and could be nothing but an object of knowledge. From this point of view the human being is, par excellence, a being
gifted with reason, and this gift was conceived as localized exclusively in the
soul. Thus the body, by definition incapable of reason, does not have anything that meets reason/subject. The radical separation produced between
reason/subject and body and their relations should be seen only as relations
between the human subject/reason and the human body/nature, or between
spirit and nature. In this way, in Eurocentric rationality the body was fixed
as object of knowledge, outside of the environment of subject/reason.
Without this objectification of the body as nature, its expulsion
from the sphere of the spirit (and this is my strong thesis), the “scientific”
theorization of the problem of race (as in the case of the comte de Gobineau [1853–57] during the nineteenth century) would have hardly been
possible. From the Eurocentric perspective, certain races are condemned
as inferior for not being rational subjects. They are objects of study, consequently bodies closer to nature. In a sense, they became dominable and
exploitable. According to the myth of the state of nature and the chain of
the civilizing process that culminates in European civilization, some races—
blacks, American Indians, or yellows—are closer to nature than whites.24
It was only within this peculiar perspective that non-European peoples
were considered as an object of knowledge and domination/exploitation by
Europeans virtually to the end of World War II.
This new and radical dualism affected not only the racial relations
of domination, but the older sexual relations of domination as well. Women,
especially the women of inferior races (“women of color”), remained stereotyped together with the rest of the bodies, and their place was all the more

556

Nepantla

inferior for their race, so that they were considered much closer to nature or
(as was the case with black slaves) directly within nature. It is probable (although the question remains to be investigated) that the new idea of gender
has been elaborated after the new and radical dualism of the Eurocentric
cognitive perspective in the articulation of the coloniality of power.
Furthermore, the new radical dualism was amalgamated in the
eighteenth century with the new mystified ideas of “progress” and of the
state of nature in the human trajectory: the foundational myths of the Eurocentric version of modernity. The peculiar dualist/evolutionist historical
perspective was linked to the foundational myths. Thus, all non-Europeans
could be considered as pre-European and at the same time displaced on a
certain historical chain from the primitive to the civilized, from the rational
to the irrational, from the traditional to the modern, from the magic-mythic
to the scientific. In other words, from the non-European/pre-European to
something that in time will be Europeanized or modernized. Without considering the entire experience of colonialism and coloniality, this intellectual
trademark, as well as the long-lasting global hegemony of Eurocentrism,
would hardly be explicable. The necessities of capital as such alone do not
exhaust, could not exhaust, the explanation of the character and trajectory
of this perspective of knowledge.
Eurocentrism and Historical Experience in Latin America

The Eurocentric perspective of knowledge operates as a mirror that distorts
what it reflects, as we can see in the Latin American historical experience.
That is to say, what we Latin Americans find in that mirror is not completely chimerical, since we possess so many and such important historically
European traits in many material and intersubjective aspects. But at the
same time we are profoundly different. Consequently, when we look in our
Eurocentric mirror, the image that we see is not just composite, but also
necessarily partial and distorted. Here the tragedy is that we have all been
led, knowingly or not, wanting it or not, to see and accept that image as our
own and as belonging to us alone. In this way, we continue being what we
are not. And as a result we can never identify our true problems, much less
resolve them, except in a partial and distorted way.
Eurocentrism and the “National Question”: The Nation-State

One of the clearest examples of this tragedy of equivocations in Latin America is the history of the so-called national question: the problem of the modern nation-state in Latin America. I will attempt here to review some basic

557

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

issues of the national question in relation to Eurocentrism and the coloniality of power, which, as far as I know, is a perspective that has not been fully
explored.25 State formations in Europe and in the Americas are linked and
distinguished by coloniality of power.
Nations and states are an old phenomenon. However, what is
currently called the “modern” nation-state is a very specific experience. It
is a society where, within a space of domination, power is organized with
some important degree of democratic relations (as democratic as possible
in a power structure), basically in the control of labor, resources, products,
and public authority. The society is nationalized because democratized,
and therefore the character of the state is as national and as democratic
as the power existing within such a space of domination. Thus a modern
nation-state involves the modern institutions of citizenship and political
democracy, but only in the way in which citizenship can function as legal,
civil, and political equality for socially unequal people (Quijano 1998a).
A nation-state is a sort of individualized society between others.
Therefore, its members can feel it as an identity. However, societies are
power structures. Power articulates forms of dispersed and diverse social
existence into one totality, one society. Every power structure always involves, partially or totally, the imposition by some (usually a particular
small group) over the rest. Therefore, every possible nation-state is a structure of power in the same way in which it is a product of power. It is a
structure of power by the ways in which the following elements have been
articulated: (a) the disputes over the control of labor and its resources and
products; (b) sex and its resources and products; (c) authority and its specific
violence; (d) intersubjectivity and knowledge.
Nevertheless, if a modern nation-state can be expressed by its
members as an identity, it is not only because it can be imagined as a
community.26 The members need to have something real in common. And
this, in all modern nation-states, is a more or less democratic participation
in the distribution of the control of power. This is the specific manner of
homogenizing people in the modern nation-state. Every homogenization in
the modern nation-state is, of course, partial and temporary and consists of
the common democratic participation in the generation and management of
the institutions of public authority and its specific mechanisms of violence.
This authority is exercised in every sphere of social existence linked to the
state and thus is accepted as explicitly political. But such a sphere could
not be democratic (involving people placed in unequal relations of power

558

Nepantla

as legally and civilly equal citizens) if the social relations in all of the other
spheres of social existence are radically undemocratic or antidemocratic.27
Since every nation-state is a structure of power, this implies that the
power has been configured along a very specific process. The process always
begins with centralized political power over a territory and its population
(or a space of domination), because the process of possible nationalization
can occur only in a given space, along a prolonged period of time, with
the precise space being more or less stable for a long period. As a result,
nationalization requires a stable and centralized political power. This space
is, in this sense, necessarily a space of domination disputed and victoriously
guarded against rivals.
In Europe, the process that brought the formation of structures of
power later configured as the modern nation-state began, on one hand, with
the emergence of some small political nuclei that conquered their space of
domination and imposed themselves over the diverse and heterogeneous
peoples, identities, and states that inhabited it. In this way the nation-state
began as a process of colonization of some peoples over others that were,
in this sense, foreigners, and therefore the nation-state depended on the
organization of one centralized state over a conquered space of domination.
In some particular cases, as in Spain, which owes much to the “conquest”
of America and its enormous and free resources, the process included the
expulsion of some groups, such as the Muslims and Jews, considered to
be undesirable foreigners. This was the first experience of ethnic cleansing
exercising the coloniality of power in the modern period and was followed
by the imposition of the “certificate of purity of blood.”28 On the other hand,
that process of state centralization was parallel to the imposition of imperial
colonial domination that began with the colonization of America, which
means that the first European centralized states emerged simultaneously
with the formation of the colonial empires.
The process has a twofold historical movement, then. It began
as an internal colonization of peoples with different identities who inhabited the same territories as the colonizers. Those territories were converted
into spaces of internal domination located in the same spaces of the future
nation-states. The process continued, simultaneously carrying on an imperial or external colonization of peoples that not only had different identities
than those of the colonizers, but inhabited territories that were not considered spaces of internal domination of the colonizers. That is to say, the
external colonized peoples were not inhabiting the same territories of the
future nation-state of the colonizers.

559

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

If we look back from our present historical perspective to what
happened with the first centralized European states, to their spaces of domination of peoples and territories and their respective processes of nationalization, we will see that the differences are very visible. The existence
of a strong central state was not sufficient to produce a process of relative
homogenization of a previously diverse and heterogeneous population in
order to create a common identity and a strong and long-lasting loyalty to
that identity. Among these cases, France was probably the most successful,
just as Spain was the least.
Why France and not Spain? In its beginnings, Spain was much
richer and more powerful than its peers. However, after the expulsion of
the Muslims and Jews, Spain stopped being productive and prosperous
and became a conveyor belt for moving the resources of America to the
emergent centers of financial and commercial capital. At the same time,
after the violent and successful attack against the autonomy of the rural
communities and cities and villages, it remained trapped in a feudal-like
seignorial structure of power under the authority of a repressive and corrupt
monarchy and church. The Spanish monarchy chose, moreover, a bellicose
politics in search of an expansion of its royal power in Europe, instead of
hegemony over the world market and commercial and finance capital, as
England and France would later do. All of the fights to force the controllers
of power to allow or negotiate some democratization of society and the
state were defeated, notably the liberal revolution of 1810–12. In this way
the combined internal colonization and aristocratic patterns of political and
social power proved to be fatal for the nationalization of Spanish society
and state, insofar as this type of power proved to be incapable of sustaining
any resulting advantage of its rich and vast imperial colonialism. It proved,
equally, that it was a very powerful obstacle to every democratizing process,
and not only within the space of its own domination.
On the contrary, in France, through the French Revolution’s radical democratization of social and political relations, the previous internal
colonization evolved toward an effective, although not complete, “frenchification” of the peoples that inhabited French territory, originally so diverse
and historical-structurally heterogeneous, just as those under Spanish dominition. The French Basque, for example, are in the first place French,
just like the Navarrese. Not so in Spain.
In each one of the cases of successful nationalization of societies
and states in Europe, the experience was the same: a considerable process of
democratization of society was the basic condition for the nationalization

560

Nepantla

of that society and of the political organization of a modern nation-state. In
fact, there is no known exception to this historical trajectory of the process
that drives the formation of the nation-state.
The Nation-State in America: The United States

If we examine the experience of America in its Spanish and Anglo areas, equivalent factors can be recognized. In the Anglo-American area, the
colonial occupation of territory was violent from the start. But before independence, known in the United States as the American Revolution, the
occupied territory was very small. The Indians did not inhabit occupied
territory—they were not colonized. Therefore, the diverse indigenous peoples were formally recognized as nations, and international commercial
relations were practiced with them, including the formation of military alliances in the wars between English and French colonists. Indians were not
incorporated into the space of Anglo-American colonial domination. Thus
when the history of the new nation-state called the United States of America
began, Indians were excluded from that new society and were considered
foreigners. Later on, they were dispossessed of their lands and were almost
exterminated. Only then were the survivors imprisoned in North American
society as a colonized race. In the beginning, then, colonial/racial relations
existed only between whites and blacks. This last group was fundamental
for the economy of the colonial society, just as during the first long moment
of the new nation. However, blacks were a relatively limited demographic
minority, while whites composed the large majority.
At the foundation of the United States as an independent country, the process of the constitution of a new model of power went together
with the configuration of the nation-state. In spite of the colonial relation
of domination between whites and blacks and the colonial extermination
of the indigenous population, we must admit, given the overwhelming
majority of whites, that the new nation-state was genuinely representative of the greater part of the population. The social whiteness of North
American society included the millions of European immigrants arriving
in the second half of the nineteenth century. Furthermore, the conquest of
indigenous territories resulted in the abundance of the offer of a basic resource of production: land. Therefore, the appropriation of land could be
concentrated in a few large states, while at the same time distributed in a vast
proportion of middling and small properties. Through these mechanisms
of land distribution, the whites found themselves in a position to exercise
a notably democratic participation in the generation and management of

561

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

public authority. The coloniality of the new model of power was not cancelled, however, since American Indians and blacks could not have a place
at all in the control of the resources of production, or in the institutions and
mechanisms of public authority.
About halfway through the nineteenth century, Tocqueville (1835,
chaps. 16–17) observed that in the United States people of such diverse cultural, ethnic, and national origins were all incorporated into something that
seemed like a machine for national reidentification; they rapidly became
U.S. citizens and acquired a new national identity, while preserving for
some time their original identities. Tocqueville found that the basic mechanism for this process of nationalization was the opening of democratic
participation in political life for all recently arrived immigrants. They were
brought toward an intense political participation, although with the choice
to participate or not. But Tocqueville also saw that two specific groups were
not allowed participation in political life: blacks and Indians. This discrimination was the limit of the impressive and massive process of modern
nation-state formation in the young republic of the United States of America. Tocqueville did not neglect to advise that unless social and political
discrimination were to be eliminated, the process of national construction
would be limited. A century later, another European, Gunnar Myrdall
(1944), saw these same limitations in the national process of the United
States when the source of immigration changed and immigrants were no
longer white Europeans but, for the most part, nonwhites from Latin America and Asia. The colonial relations of the whites with the new immigrants
introduced a new risk for the reproduction of the nation. Without doubt,
those risks are increasing this very day insofar as the old myth of the melting
pot has been forcefully abandoned and racism tends to be newly sharpened
and violent.
In sum, the coloniality of the relations of domination/exploitation/
conflict between whites and nonwhites was not, at the moment of the
constitution of a new independent state, sufficiently powerful to impede
the relative, although real and important, democratization of the control of
the means of production and of the state. At the beginning control rested
only among the whites, true, but with enough vigor so that nonwhites could
claim it later as well. The entire power structure could be configured in the
trajectory and orientation of reproducing and broadening the democratic
foundations of the nation-state. It is this trajectory to which, undoubtedly,
the idea of the American Revolution refers.

562

Nepantla

Latin America: The Southern Cone and the White Majority

At first glance, the situation in the countries of the so-called Southern Cone
of Latin America (Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay) was similar to what
happened in the United States. Indians, for the most part, were not integrated into colonial society, insofar as they had more or less the same social
and cultural structure of the North American Indians. Socially, both groups
were not available to become exploited workers, not condemnable to forced
labor for the colonists. In these three countries, the black slaves were also
a minority during the colonial period, in contrast with other regions dominated by the Spanish or Portuguese. After independence, the dominants
in the countries of the Southern Cone, as was the case in the United States,
considered the conquest of the territories that the indigenous peoples populated, as well as the extermination of these inhabitants, necessary as an
expeditious form of homogenizing the national population and facilitating
the process of constituting a modern nation-state “a la europea.” In Argentina and Uruguay this was done in the nineteenth century, and in Chile
during the first three decades of the twentieth century. These countries also
attracted millions of European immigrants, consolidating, in appearance,
the whiteness of the societies of Argentina, Uruguay, and Chile and the
process of homogenization.
Land distribution was a basic difference in those countries, especially in Argentina, in comparison with the case of North America. While
in the United States the distribution of land happened in a less concentrated way over a long period, in Argentina the extreme concentration of
land possession, particularly in lands taken from indigenous peoples, made
impossible any type of democratic social relations among the whites themselves. Instead of a democratic society capable of representing and politically
organizing into a democratic state, what was constituted was an oligarchic
society and state, only partially dismantled after World War II. In the Argentinean case, these determinations were undoubtedly associated with the
fact that colonial society, above all on the Atlantic coast (which became
hegemonic over the rest), was lightly developed, and therefore its recognition as seat of a viceroyalty came only in the second half of the eighteenth
century. Its rapid transformation in the last quarter of the eighteenth century as one of the more prosperous areas in the world market was one
of the main forces that drove a massive migration from southern, eastern,
and central Europe in the following century. But this migratory population did not find in Argentina a society with a sufficiently dense and stable

563

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

structure, history, and identity to incorporate and identify themselves with
it, as occurred in the United States. At the end of the nineteenth century,
immigrants from Europe comprised more than 80 percent of Buenos Aires’s
population. They did not immediately enforce the national identity, instead
preferring their own European cultural differences, while at the same time
explicitly rejecting the identity associated with Latin America’s heritage
and, in particular, any relationship with the indigenous population.29
The concentration of land was somewhat less strong in Chile and
in Uruguay. In these two countries, especially in Chile, the number of European immigrants was fewer. But overall they found a society, a state, and
an identity already sufficiently densely constituted, to which they incorporated and identified themselves much sooner and more completely than
in Argentina. In the case of Chile, territorial expansion at the expense of
Bolivia’s and Peru’s national frontiers allowed the Chilean bourgeoisie the
control of resources whose importance has defined, from then on, the country’s history: saltpeter, first, and copper a little later. From the middle of
the nineteenth century, the pampas saltpeter miners formed the first major
contingent of salaried workers in Latin America; later, in copper mines,
the backbone of the old republic’s workers’ social and political organizations was formed. The profits distributed between the British and Chilean
bourgeoisie allowed the push toward commercial agriculture and urban
commercial economy. New classes of salaried urbanites and a relatively
large middle class came together with the modernization of an important
part of the landed and commercial bourgeoisie. These conditions made it
possible for the workers and the middle class to negotiate the conditions of
domination, exploitation, and conflict with some success and to struggle for
democracy in the conditions of capitalism between 1930 and 1935. In this
way, the power could be configured as a modern nation-state—of whites,
of course. The Indians, a scanty minority of survivors inhabiting the poorest and most inhospitable lands in the country, were excluded from such
nation-states. Until recently they were sociologically invisible; they are not
so much today as they begin to mobilize in defense of these same lands that
are at risk of being lost in the face of global capital.
The process of the racial homogenization of a society’s members,
imagined from a Eurocentric perspective as one characteristic and condition
of modern nation-states, was carried out in the countries of the Southern
Cone not by means of the decolonization of social and political relations
among the diverse sectors of the population, but through a massive elimination of some of them (Indians) and the exclusion of others (blacks and

564

Nepantla

mestizos). Homogenization was achieved not by means of the fundamental
democratization of social and political relations, but by the exclusion of a
significant part of the population, one that since the sixteenth century had
been racially classified and marginalized from citizenship and democracy.
Given these original conditions, democracy and the nation-state could not
be stable and firmly constituted. The political history of these countries,
especially from the end of the 1960s until today, cannot be explained at the
margins of these determinations.30
Indian, Black, and Mestizo Majority:
The Impossible “Modern Nation-State”

After the defeat of Tupac Amaru and of the Haitian Revolution, only Mexico (since 1910) and Bolivia (since 1952) came along the road of social decolonization through a revolutionary process, during which the decolonization
of power was able to gain substantial ground before being contained and
defeated. At the beginning of independence, principally in those countries
that were demographically and territorially extensive at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, approximately 90 percent of the total population
was composed of American Indians, blacks, and mestizos. However, in
all those countries, those races were denied all possible participation in
decisions about social and political organization during the process of organizing the new state. The small white minority that assumed control of
those states sought the advantage of being free from the legislation of the
Spanish crown, which formally ordered the protection of colonized peoples
or races. From then on the white minority included the imposition of new
colonial tribute on the Indians, even while maintaining the slavery of blacks
for many decades. Of course, this dominant minority was now at liberty to
expand its ownership of the land at the expense of the territories reserved
for Indians by the Spanish crown’s regulations. In the case of Brazil, blacks
were slaves and Indians from the Amazon were foreigners to the new state.
Haiti was an exceptional case in that it produced a national, social,
and racial revolution—a real and global decolonization of power—in the
same historical movement. Repeated military interventions by the United
States brought about its defeat. The other potentially national process in
Latin America took place in the Viceroyalty of Peru in 1780, under the
leadership of Tupac Amaru II, but was defeated quickly. From then on, the
dominant group in all the rest of the Iberian colonies successfully avoided
social decolonization while fighting to gain independent status.

565

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

Such new states could not be considered nations unless it could be
admitted that the small minority of colonizers in control were genuinely
nationally representative of the entire colonized population. The societies
founded in colonial domination of American blacks, Indians, and mestizos could not be considered nations, much less democratic. This situation
presents an apparent paradox: independent states of colonial societies.31
The paradox is only partial and superficial, however, when we observe
more carefully the social interests of the dominant groups in those colonial
societies and their independent states.
In Anglo-American colonial society, since Indians were a foreign
people living outside the confines of colonial society, Indian serfdom was
not as extensive as in Ibero-America. Indentured servants brought from
Great Britain were not legally serfs and, after independence, they were not
indentured for very long. Black slaves were very important to the economy, but they were a demographic minority. And from the beginning of
independence, economic productivity was achieved in great part by waged
laborers and independent producers. During the colonial period in Chile,
Indian serfdom was restricted, since local American Indian servants were a
small minority. Black slaves, despite being more important for the economy,
were also a small minority. For these reasons, colonized racial groups were
not as large a source of free labor as in the rest of the Iberian countries. Consequently, from the beginning of independence an increasing proportion of
local production would have to be based on wages, a reason why the internal
market was vital for the premonopoly bourgeoisie. Thus, for the dominant
classes in both the United States and Chile, the local waged labor and the
internal production and market were preserved and protected by external
competition as the only and the most important source of capitalist profits.
Furthermore, the internal market had to be expanded and protected. In
this sense, there were some areas of common national interest of waged
laborers, independent producers, and the local bourgeois. With the limitations derived from the exclusion of blacks and mestizos, this was a national
interest for the large majority of the population of the new nation-state.
Independent States and Colonial Society:
Historical-Structural Dependence

The preceding summary of nation-state formation and colonial relations
in America allows us to underline that in certain Ibero-American societies,
the small white minority in control of the independent states and the colonial societies could have had neither consciousness nor national interests

566

Nepantla

in common with the American Indians, blacks, and mestizos. On the contrary, their social interests were explicitly antagonistic to American Indian
serfs and black slaves, given that their privileges were made from precisely
the dominance and exploitation of those peoples in such a way that there
was no area of common interest between whites and nonwhites and, consequently, no common national interest for all of them. Therefore, from the
point of view of the dominators, their social interests were much closer to
the interests of their European peers, and consequently they were always
inclined to follow the interests of the European bourgeoisie. They were,
then, dependent.
They were dependent in this specific way not because they were
subordinated by a greater economic or political power. By whom could
they have been subordinated? Spain and Portugal were by the nineteenth
century too weak and underdeveloped, unable to exercise any kind of neocolonialism like the English and French were able to do in certain African
countries after the political independence of those countries. In the nineteenth century, the United States was absorbed in the conquest of Indian
territory and the extermination of the Indian population, initiating its imperial expansion on parts of the Caribbean, without the capacity yet for
further expanding its political or economic dominance. England tried to
occupy Buenos Aires in 1806 and was defeated.
The Latin American white seigniors, owners of political power
and serfs and slaves, did not have common interests with those workers that were the overwhelming majority of the populations of those new
states. Actually, they were exactly antagonistic. And while the white bourgeoisie expanded the capitalist social relation as the axis of articulation of the
economy and society in Europe and the United States, the Latin American
seigniors could not accumulate abundant commercial profits to pay for a
salaried labor force precisely because that went against the reproduction of
their dominion. The white seigniors’ commercial profits were allotted for
the ostentatious consumption of commodities produced in Europe.
The dependence of the seigniorial capitalists of the new IberoAmerican nation-states had an inescapable source: the coloniality of their
power led to the perception of their social interests as the same as other
dominant whites in Europe and the United States. That coloniality of
power itself, however, prevented them from really developing their social interests in the same direction as those of their European peers, that
is, converting commercial capital (profits produced either by slavery, serfdom, or reciprocity) into industrial capital, since that involved liberating

567

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

American Indian serfs and black slaves and making them waged laborers.
For obvious reasons, the colonial dominators of the new independent states,
especially in South America after the crisis at the end of the eighteenth century, could not be in that configuration except as minor partners of the
European bourgeoisie. When much later it was necessary to free the slaves,
freedom was not a transformation of labor relations, but a reason to substitute slaves with immigrant workers from other countries, European and
Asiatic. The elimination of American Indian serfdom is very recent. There
were no common social interests with colonized and exploited workers, nor
was there an internal market that would have included the wage laborer,
since no such internal market was in the interest of the dominators. Simply
put, there was no national interest regarding seigniorial bourgeoisie.
The dependence of the seigniorial capitalists did not come from
national subordination. On the contrary, this was the consequence of the
community of racialized social interests with their European peers. We are
addressing here the concept of historical-structural dependence, which is
very different from the nationalist proposals conceptualized as external or
structural dependence (Quijano 1967). Subordination came much later, as
a consequence of dependence and not the inverse: During the global economic crisis of the 1930s, the bourgeoisie, holding most of Latin America’s
commercial capital (that of Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Uruguay, and,
to a certain extent, Colombia), was forced to produce locally its conspicuous
consumption of imported products. This period was the beginning of the
peculiar system followed by Latin American dependent industrialization:
the substitution of imported goods for ostentatious consumption (by the
seignior class and their small groups of middle-class associates) taking the
place of local products intended for that same consumption. For that reason,
it was not necessary to globally reorganize the local economies, to massively
liberate and pay wages to serfs and slaves, to produce its own technology.
Industrialization through the substitution of imports is, in Latin America,
a defining case of the implications of the coloniality of power.32
In this sense, the process of independence for Latin American
states without decolonizing society could not have been, and it was not, a
process toward the development of modern nation-states, but was instead a
rearticulation of the coloniality of power over new institutional bases. From
then on, for almost two hundred years, workers and critical intellectuals
have been concerned with the attempt to advance along the road of nationalization, democratizing our societies and our states. In no Latin American
country today is it possible to find a fully nationalized society, or even a

568

Nepantla

genuine nation-state. The national homogenization of the population could
only have been achieved through a radical and global process of the democratization of society and the state. That democratization would have
implied, and should imply before anything else, the process of decolonizing
social, political, and cultural relations that maintain and reproduce racial
social classification. The structure of power was and even continues to be
organized on and around the colonial axis. Consequently, from the point
of view of the dominant groups, the construction of the nation, and above
all the central state, has been conceptualized and deployed against American Indians, blacks, and mestizos. The coloniality of power still exercises
its dominance, in the greater part of Latin America, against democracy,
citizenship, the nation, and the modern nation-state.
From this perspective, four historical trajectories and ideological
lines can be distinguished today in the problem of the nation-state:
1. A limited but real process of decolonization/democratization
through radical revolutions, such as in Mexico and Bolivia. In
Mexico, the process of the decolonization of power was slowly
limited from the 1960s, until finally entering a period of crisis at
the end of the 1970s. In Bolivia the revolution was defeated in 1965.
2. A limited but real process of colonial (racial) homogenization,
as in the Southern Cone (Chile, Uruguay, Argentina), by means
of a massive genocide of the aboriginal population. A variant of
this line is Colombia, where the original population was almost
exterminated and replaced with blacks during the colonial period.
3. An always frustrated attempt at cultural homogenization through
the cultural genocide of American Indians, blacks, and mestizos,
as in Mexico, Peru, Ecuador, Guatemala, Central America, and
Bolivia.
4. The imposition of an ideology of “racial democracy” that masks
the true discrimination and colonial domination of blacks, as in
Brazil, Colombia, and Venezuela. It is with difficulty that someone
can recognize with seriousness a true citizen of the population of
African origin in those countries, although the racial tensions and
conflicts are not as violent and explicit as those in South Africa or
the southern United States.
These trajectories show that there is, without doubt, an element that radically impedes the development and culmination of the nationalization of

569

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

society and state, insofar as it impedes their democratization, since one cannot find any historical examples where modern nation-states are not the
result of a social and political democratization. What is, or could be, that
element?
In the European world, and therefore in the Eurocentric perspective, the formation of nation-states has been theorized—imagined, in
truth—as the expression of the homogenization of the population in terms
of common historic subjective experiences. Nation is an identity and a loyalty, especially for liberalism. At first sight, the successful cases of nationalization of societies and states in Europe seem to side with that focus. The
homogenizing seemingly consists basically of the formation of a common
space for identity and meaning for the population. However, this, in all
cases, is the result of the democratization of society that can be organized
and expressed in a democratic state. The pertinent question, at this stage
of the argument, is why has that been possible in Western Europe and,
with some well-known limitations, in all the world of European identity
(Canada, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand, for example)?
Why has it not been possible in Latin America until today, even in a partial
and precarious way?
To begin with, would social and political democratization have
been possible, for instance in France, the classic example of the modern
nation-state, if the racial factor had been included? It is very unlikely.
To this very day it is easy to observe in France the national problem and
the debate produced by the presence of nonwhite populations originating
from France’s former colonies. Obviously, it is not a matter of ethnicity,
culture, or religious beliefs. It is sufficient to remember that a century
earlier, the Dreyfus affair showed the French capacity for discrimination,
but its conclusions also demonstrated that for many French people, the
identity of origin was not a requisite determinant to be a member of the
French nation, as long as your “color” was French. The French Jews today
are more French than the children of Africans, Arabs, and Latin Americans
born in France, not to mention what happened with Russian and Spanish
immigrants whose children, having been born in France, are French.
This means that the coloniality of power based on the imposition
of the idea of race as an instrument of domination has always been a limiting factor for constructing a nation-state based on a Eurocentric model.
Whether to a lesser extent, as is the case in North America, or in a decisive way, as in Latin America, the limiting factor is visible in both cases.
As I have shown, the degree of limitation depends on the proportion of

570

Nepantla

colonized races within the total population and on the density of their social and cultural institutions. Because of all of this, the coloniality of power
established on the idea of race should be accepted as a basic factor in the national question and the nation-state. The problem is, however, that in Latin
America the Eurocentric perspective was adopted by the dominant groups
as their own, leading them to impose the European model of nation-state
formation for structures of power organized around colonial relations. All
the same, we now find ourselves in a labyrinth where the Minotaur is always
visible, but with no Ariadne to show us the exit we long for.
Eurocentrism and Revolution in Latin America

A final note of this tragic disjuncture between our experience and our
Eurocentric perspective of knowledge is the debate about, and practice of,
revolutionary projects. In the twentieth century, the vast majority of the
Latin American Left, adhering to historical materialism, has debated two
types of revolution: bourgeois-democratic or socialist. Competing with that
Left, between 1925 and 1935, the movement called “aprista”33 proposed an
anti-imperialist revolution. It was conceived as a process of purification of
the character of the economy and society, eliminating feudal adherences
and developing its capitalist side, as well as encouraging the modernization
and development of society by means of the national-state control of the
principal means of production as a transition toward a socialist revolution.
The major theorist of APRA, which made such proposals, was the Peruvian
Haya de la Torre. From the end of World War II, that project has become
a sort of social liberalism34 and has been exhausted.
In a brief and schematic but not arbitrary way, the Latin American debate about the democratic-bourgeois revolution can be presented as a
project in which the bourgeoisie organized the working class, peasants, and
other dominated groups in order to uproot the feudal aristocrats’ control of
the state and organize society and the state in terms of their own interest.
The central assumption of that project was that in Latin America, society
is fundamentally feudal or, at the most, semifeudal, since capitalism is still
incipient, marginal, and subordinate. The socialist revolution, on the other
hand, is conceived as the eradication of bourgeois control of the state by
the industrial working class heading a coalition of the exploited and the
dominated classes in order to impose state control on the means of production and to construct a new society through the state. The assumption of
that proposition is, obviously, that the economy and, therefore, society and
state in Latin America are basically capitalist. In its language, that implies

571

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

that capital as a social relation of production is already dominant, and that
consequently the bourgeoisie is also dominant in society and state. It admits that there are feudal remnants and democratic-bourgeois tasks in the
trajectory of the socialist revolution. In fact, the political debate of the past
half century in Latin America has been anchored in whether the economy,
society, and state were feudal/semifeudal or capitalist. The majority of the
Latin American Left, until recently, adhered to the democratic-bourgeois
proposition, following all the central tenets of “real socialism” with its head
in Moscow or Peking.
In order to believe that in Latin America a democratic-bourgeois
revolution based on the European model is not only possible but necessary, it
is essential to recognize in America and more precisely in Latin America: (1)
the sequential relation between feudalism and capitalism; (2) the historical
existence of feudalism and consequently the historically antagonistic conflict
between feudal aristocracy and the bourgeois; (3) a bourgeoisie interested
in carrying out similar revolutionary business. We know that in China
at the beginning of the 1930s, Mao proposed the idea of a new type of
democratic revolution because the bourgeoisie was neither interested nor
capable of carrying out that historical mission. In this case, a coalition
of exploited/dominated classes under the leadership of the working class
should substitute for the bourgeoisie and undertake the new democratic
revolution.
In America, however, for five hundred years capital has existed as
the dominant axis of the total articulation of all historically known forms of
control and exploitation of labor, thus configuring a historical-structurally
heterogeneous model of power with discontinuous relations and conflicts
among its components. In Latin America there was not an evolutionist
sequence between modes of production; there was no previous feudalism
detached from and antagonistic to capital; there was no feudal seignior in
control of the state whom a bourgeoisie urgently in need of power would
have to evict by revolutionary means. If a sequence existed, it is without
doubt surprising that the followers of historical materialism did not fight
for an antislavery revolution prior to the antifeudal revolution, prior in
turn to the anticapitalist revolution. In the greater part of this hemisphere
(including the United States, all of the Caribbean, Venezuela, Columbia,
Brazil, and the coasts of Ecuador and Peru), slavery has been more extensive
and more powerful. But, clearly, slavery ended before the twentieth century,
and the feudal seigniors had inherited power. Isn’t that true?

572

Nepantla

Therefore, an antifeudal, democratic-bourgeois revolution in the
Eurocentric sense has always been an historical impossibility. The only
democratic revolutions that really occurred in America (apart from the
American Revolution) have been the Mexican and Bolivian, popular
revolutions—nationalist, anti-imperialist, anticolonial; that is, against the
coloniality of power and oligarchies, against the control of the state by the
seigniorial bourgeois under the protection of the imperial bourgeoisie. In
the majority of the other countries, the process has been one of gradual and
uneven purification of the social character, society, and state. Consequently,
the process has always been very slow, irregular, and partial. Could it have
been any other way?
All possible democratization of society in Latin America should
occur in the majority of these countries at the same time and in the same
historical movement as decolonization and as a radical redistribution of
power. The reason underlying these statements is that social classes in Latin
America are marked by color, any color that can be found in any country
at any time. This means that the classification of people is realized not only
in one sphere of power—the economy, for example—but in each and every
sphere. Domination is the requisite for exploitation, and race is the most effective instrument for domination that, associated with exploitation, serves
as the universal classifier in the current global model of power. In terms of
the national question, only through the process of the democratization of
society can the construction of a modern nation-state, with all of its implications, including citizenship and political representation, be possible and
successful. But under the ongoing process of reconcentration of power at a
global scale, that perspective may well not be feasible any longer and a process of democratization of society and public authority may require some
quite different institutional structure.
With respect to the Eurocentric mirage about “socialist” revolutions (as control of the state and as state control of labor/resources/product),
it should be emphasized that such a perspective is founded in two radically
false theoretical assumptions. First, the idea of a homogeneous capitalist society, in the sense that capital exists only as social relation and therefore that
the waged industrial working class is the majority of the population. But we
have just seen that this has never been so in either Latin America or the rest
of the world, and that it will most assuredly never occur. Second, there is
the assumption that socialism consists in the state control of each and every
sphere of power and social existence, beginning with the control of labor,
because from the state a new society can be constructed. This assumption

573

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

puts history, again, on its head, since even in the crude terms of historical
materialism, the state, a superstructure, becomes the base of construction
of society. By the same token it hides the reconcentration of the control of
power, which necessarily brings total despotism of the controllers, making
it appear to be radical redistribution of the control of power. But socialism,
if the word still has some effective meaning, cannot be something other than
the trajectory of a radical return of the control over labor/resources/product,
over sex/resources/products, over authorities/institutions/violence, and over
intersubjectivity/knowledge/communication to the daily life of the people.
This is what I have proposed since 1972 as the socialization of power (Quijano 1972, 1981).
In 1928, José Carlos Mariátegui was, without a doubt, the first to
begin to see (and not just in Latin America) that in his space/time, the social
relations of power, whatever their previous character, existed and acted
simultaneously and together in a single and whole structure of power. He
perceived that there could not be a homogeneous unity, with continuous
relations among its elements, moving itself in a continuous and systematic
history. Therefore, the idea of a socialist revolution by historical necessity
had to be directed against the whole of that power. Far from consisting of a
new bureaucratic reconcentration of power, it could have meaning only as a
redistribution among the people, in their daily lives, of the control over their
conditions of social existence.35 After Mariátegui, the debate was not taken
up again in Latin America until the 1960s, and in the rest of the world, it
began with the worldwide defeat of the socialist camp.
In reality, each category used to characterize the Latin American
political process has always been a partial and distorted way to look at this
reality. That is an inevitable consequence of the Eurocentric perspective,
in which a linear and one-directional evolutionism is amalgamated contradictorily with the dualist vision of history, a new and radical dualism that
separates nature from society, the body from reason, that does not know
what to do with the question of totality (simply denying it like the old empiricism or the new postmodernism) or understands it only in an organic or
systemic way, making it, thus, into a distorted perspective, impossible to be
used, except in error.
It is not, then, an accident that we have been defeated, for the
moment, in both revolutionary projects, in America and in the entire world.
What we could advance and conquer in terms of political and civil rights in
a necessary redistribution of power (of which the decolonization of power
is the presupposition and point of departure) is now being torn down in the

574

Nepantla

process of the reconcentration of the control of power in global capitalism
and of its management of the coloniality of power by the same functionaries.
Consequently, it is time to learn to free ourselves from the Eurocentric
mirror where our image is always, necessarily, distorted. It is time, finally,
to cease being what we are not.
Translated by
Michael Ennis

Notes
I want to thank Edgardo Lander and Walter Mignolo for their help in the revision of
this article. Thanks also to an anonymous reviewer for useful criticisms of a
previous version. Responsibility for the errors and limitations of the text is
mine alone.
1. On the concept of the coloniality of power, see Quijano 1992a.
2. Even though for the imperialist vision of the United States of America the term
“America” is just another name for that country, today it is the name of the
territory that extends from Alaska in the North to Cape Horn in the South,
including the Caribbean archipelago. But from 1492 until 1610, America was
exclusively the time/space under Iberian (Hispanic Portuguese) colonial domination. This included, in the northern border, California, Texas, New Mexico, Florida (conquered in the nineteenth century by the United States), the
Spanish-speaking Caribbean area, up to Cape Horn in the South—roughly,
the time/space of today’s Latin America. The Eurocentered, capitalist, colonial/modern power emerged then and there. So, though today America is a
very heterogeneous world in terms of power and culture, and for descriptive
purposes could be better referred to as the Americas, in regards to the history
of the specific pattern of world power that is discussed here, “America” still
is the proper denomination.
3. See Quijano and Wallerstein 1992.
4. On this question and the possible antecedents to race before America, see Quijano
1992b.
5. The invention of the category of “color”—first as the most visible indication of race
and later simply as its equivalent—as much as the invention of the particular
category of “white,” still requires a more exhaustive historical investigation. In
every case, they were most probably Anglo-American inventions, since there
are no traces of these categories in the chronicles and other documents from
the first one hundred years of Iberian colonialism in America. For the case

575

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

of Anglo-America, an extensive bibliography exists. Allen 1994 and Jacobson
1998 are among the most important works on this topic. The problem is
that this explanation ignores what happened in Iberian America. Due to this
elision, we still lack sufficient information on this specific problem for that
region. Therefore, this is still an open question. It is very interesting that
despite the fact that those who would be “Europeans” in the future, from
the time of the Roman Empire recognized the future “Africans,” as did the
Iberians who were more or less familiar with Africans much earlier than the
conquest, but never thought of them in racial terms before the colonization
of America. In fact, race as a category was applied for the first time to the
Indians, not to blacks. In this way, race appears much earlier than color in the
history of the social classification of the global population.
6. The idea of race is literally an invention. It has nothing to do with the biological
structure of the human species. Regarding phenotypic traits, those that are
obviously found in the genetic code of individuals and groups are in that
specific sense biological. However, they have no relation to the subsystems
and biological processes of the human organism, including those involved in
the neurological and mental subsystems and their functions. See Mark 1994
and Quijano 1999.
7. Western Europe is the location on the Atlantic coast to the west of the large peninsula
protruding from the continental mass that Europeans named Asia. Fernando
Coronil (1996) has discussed the construction of the category “Occident” as
part of the formation of a global power.
8. This is precisely what Alfred Métraux, the well-known French anthropologist, found
at the end of the fifties in southern Peru. I found the same phenomenon in
1963 in Cuzco: an Indian peon was obliged to travel from his village, in La
Convención, to the city in order to fulfill his turn of service to his patrons.
But they did not furnish him lodging, or food, or, of course, a salary. Métraux
proposed that that situation was closer to the Roman colonato of the fourth
century b.c. than to European feudalism.
9. See Prebisch 1959, 1960. On Prebisch, see Baer 1962.
10. On the process of the production of new historical geocultural identities, see
O’Gorman 1954; Rabasa 1993; Dussel 1995; Mudimbe 1988; Tilly 1990; Said
1979; and Coronil 1996.
11. On these questions, see Stocking 1968; Young 1995; Quijano 1992c, 1997; and
Gruzinski 1988.
12. Around the categories produced during European colonial dominance of the world,
there exist a good many lines of debate: subaltern studies, postcolonial studies,
cultural studies, and multiculturalism are among the current ones. There is

576

Nepantla

also a flourishing bibliography, too long to be cited here, lined with famous
names such as Ranajit Guha, Gayatri Spivak, Edward Said, Homi Bhabha,
and Stuart Hall.
13. Of my previous studies, see principally Quijano 1991, 1998a.
14. A summary of the vast literature on this debate can be found in Quijano 2000a.
15. See Young 1995.
16. For a more extended debate, see Quijano 2000b in the forthcoming issue of Anuario
Mariáteguiano.
17. On the theoretical propositions of this conception of power, see Quijano n.d.
18. I mean “system” in the sense that the relations between parts and the totality are not
arbitrary and that the latter has hegemony over the parts in the orientation of
the movement of the whole. But not in a systematic sense, as the relations of
the parts among themselves and with the whole are not logically functional.
This happens only in machines and organisms, never in social relations.
19. The literature on the debate about Eurocentrism is growing rapidly. See Amin 1989
for a different (although somewhat related) position than the one that orients
this article.
20. See Wallerstein 1983; and Arrighi 1994.
21. On the origin of the category of historical-structural heterogeneity, see Quijano 1966,
1977, 1988a.
22. I have always wondered about the origin of one of liberalism’s most precious propositions: Ideas should be respected, but the body can be tortured, crushed, and
killed. Latin Americans repeatedly cite with admiration the defiant phrase
spoken while a martyr of the anticolonial battles was being beheaded: “Barbarians, ideas cannot be beheaded!” I am now sure that the origin of the idea
can be found in the new Cartesian dualism that made the body into mere
“nature.”
23. Bousquié (1994) asserts that Cartesianism is a new radical dualism.
24. The fact that the only alternative category to the Occident was, and still is, the
Orient, while blacks (Africa) or Indians (America before the United States)
did not have the honor of being the other to Europe, speaks volumes about
the processes of Eurocentered subjectivity.
25. For a more detailed discussion on these issues, see Quijano 1994, 1997.
26. For an extended discussion of this point, see Anderson 1991.
27. See Quijano 1998a and 2000b for a full discussion of the limits and conditions of
democracy in a capitalist structure of power.
28. “Purity of blood” is probably the closest antecedent to the idea of “race” produced
by Spaniards in America. See Quijano 1992b.

577

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

29. Even in the 1920s, as in the whole twentieth century, Héctor Murena, an important
member of the Argentinean intelligentsia, proclaimed, “We are Europeans
exiled in these savage pampas.” See Imaz 1964. During Argentina’s social,
political, and cultural battles in the 1960s, cabecita negra was the nickname for
racial discrimination.
30. Homogenization is a basic element of the Eurocentric perspective of nationalization.
If it were not, the national conflicts that emerge in European nations every
time the problem of racial or ethnic differences arises could not be explained
or understood. Nor could we understand the Eurocentric politics of settlement favored in the Southern Cone or the origin and meaning of the so-called
indigenous problem in all of Latin America. If nineteenth-century Peruvian
landowners imported Chinese workers, it was because the national question
was not in play for them except as naked social interests. From the Eurocentrist perspective, the seigniorial bourgeoisie, based in the coloniality of power,
has been an enemy of social and political democratization as a condition of
nationalization for the society and state.
31. In the 1960s and 1970s, many social scientists within and outside of Latin America,
including myself, used the concept of “internal colonialism” to characterize
the apparently paradoxical relationship of independent states with respect to
their colonized populations. In Latin America, Casanova (1965) and Stavenhagen (1965) were surely the most important among those who dealt with
the problem systematically. Now we know that these problems concerning
the coloniality of power go further than the institutional development of the
nation-state.
32. I have proposed some propositions on this debate in Quijano 1993.
33. Some of the movements include APRA (Revolutionary Antiimperialist Popular Alliance) in Peru, AD (Democratic Action) in Venezuela, MNR (Nationalist
Revolutionary Movement) in Bolivia, MLN (Movement for National Liberation) in Costa Rica, and the MRA (Authentic Revolutionary Movement) and
the orthodoxy in Cuba.
34. Eurocentric myopia (not only in European and American studies, but in Latin America as well) has spread and nearly imposed the term populism on movements
and projects that have little in common with the movement of the Russian
narodniks of the nineteenth century or the later North American populism.
See Quijano 1998a.
35. It is this idea that gives Mariátegui his major value and continued validity as a critic
of socialisms and their historical materialism. See, above all, the final chapter
in Mariátegui 1928a, as well as Mariátegui 1928b and 1929.

578

Nepantla

References
Allen, Theodore. 1994. The Invention of the White Race. 2 vols. London: Verso.
Amin, Samir. 1989. Eurocentrism. New York: Monthly Review.
Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities. London: Verso.
Arrighi, Giovanni. 1994. The Long Twentieth Century. London: Verso.
Baer, Werner. 1962. “The Economics of Prebisch and ECLA.” Economic Development
and Cultural Change 10.
Blaut, J. M. 1993. The Colonial Model of the World: Geographical Diffusionism and
Eurocentric History. New York: Guilford.
Bousquié, Paul. 1994. Le corps, cet inconnu. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Casanova, Pablo Gonzáles. 1965. “Internal Colonialism and National Development.”
Studies in Comparative International Development 1(4): 27–37. Proceedings of
“Coloniality of Power and Its Institutions.” 1999.
Coronil, Fernando. 1996. “Beyond Occidentalism: Toward Nonimperial Geohistorical
Categories.” Cultural Anthropology 11(1): 51–87.
Descartes, René. 1963–67. Oeuvres philosophiques. Paris: Editions Alquie.
Dussel, Enrique. 1995. The Invention of the Americas: Eclipse of the Other and the Myth of
Modernity. New York: Continuum.
Gobineau, Arthur. 1853–57. Essais sur l’inégalité des races humaines. Paris: P. Belfond.
Gruzinski, Serge. 1988. La colonisation de l’imaginaire: Sociétés indigènes et
occidentalisation dans le Mexique espagnol, XVI–XVIII. Paris: Gallimard.
Hopkins, Terrence, and Immanuel Wallerstein. 1982. World-Systems Analysis: Theory
and Methodology. Vol. 1. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Imaz, Eugenio. 1964. Nosotros mañana. Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana.
Jacobson, Mathew Frye. 1998. Whiteness of a Different Color. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Lander, Edgardo. 1997. “Colonialidad, modernidad, postmodernidad.” Anuario
Mariáteguiano 9: 122–32.
Mariátegui, José Carlos. 1928a. Siete ensayos de interpretación de la realidad peruana.
Lima: Biblioteca Amauta.
. 1928b. “Aniversario y balance.” AMAUTA, September.
. 1929. “Punto de vista antimperialista.” Obras completas. Vol. 11. Lima:
Biblioteca Amauta.
Mark, Jonathan. 1994. Human Biodiversity, Genes, Race, and History. New York:
Aldyne de Gruyter.
Mignolo, Walter. 1995. The Darker Side of the Renaissance: Literacy, Territoriality, and
Colonization. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Mudimbe, Valentine. 1988. The Invention of Africa: Gnosis, Philosophy, and the Order of
Knowledge. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

579

Quijano . Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America

Myrdall, Gunnar. 1944. American Dilemma. New York: Harper and Brothers.
O’Gorman, Eduardo. 1954. La invención de América. Mexico: FCE.
Prebisch, Raúl. 1959. “Commercial Policy in the Underdeveloped Countries.”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 49: 251–73.
. 1960. The Economic Development in Latin America and Its Principal Problems.
New York: ECLA, United Nations.
Quijano, Anibal. 1966. Notas sobre el concepto de marginalidad social. Lima: CEPAL.
. 1967. “Urbanización, cambio social y dependencia.” In América Latina:
Ensayos de interpretación sociológica, edited by Fernando Henrique Cardoso
and Francisco Weffort. Santiago: Editorial Universitaria.
. 1972. Qué es y qué no es socialismo. Lima: Ediciones Sociedad y Política.
. 1977. Imperialismo y marginalidad en América Latina. Lima: Morca Azul.
. 1981. “Poder y democracia.” Sociedad y Política 12.
. 1988a. “La nueva heterogeneidad estructural de América Latina.” In Nuevo
temas, nuevos contenidos, edited by Heinz Sonntag. Caracas:
UNESCO-Nueva Sociedad.
. 1992a. “Colonialidad y modernidad/racionalidad.” Perú indígena, 13(29).
Translated as “Coloniality and Modernity/Rationality.” In Globalizations and
Modernities, edited by Goran Therborn. 1999. Stockholm:
Forksningsradnamnden.
. 1992b. “Raza, etnia y nación: Cuestiones abiertas.” In J. C. Mariátegui y
Europa: El otro descubrimiento, edited by Roland Forgues. Lima: Amauta.
. 1992c. “Réflexions sur l’interdisciplinarité, le développement et les relations
interculturelles.” Entre savoirs: Interdisciplinarité en acte: Enjeux, obstacles
résultants. Paris: UNESCO-ERES.
. 1993. “América Latina en la economía mundial.” Problemas del desarollo 24
(95).
. 1994. “Colonialité du pouvoir, démocratie et citoyenneté en Amérique
Latine.” In Amérique Latine: Démocratie et exclusion. Paris: L’Harmattan.
. 1997. “Colonialidad de poder, cultura y conocimiento en América Latina.”
Anuario Mariáteguiano 9: 113–22.
. 1998a. “Estado nacion, ciudadanía y democracia: Cuestiones abiertas.” In
Democracia para una nueva sociedad, edited by Helena Gonzales and Heidulf
Schmidt. Caracas: Nueva Sociedad.
. 1999. “Que tal raza!” In Familia y cambio social. Lima: CECOSAM.
. 2000a. “El fantasma del desarrollo en América Latina.” In América Latina y el
desarrollo, edited by Alberto Acosta. Forthcoming.
. 2000b. “Modernidad y democracia: Intereses y conflictos.” Anuario
Mariáteguiano 12.

580

Nepantla

. n.d. “Coloniality of Power and Its Institutions.” Paper presented at
conference Coloniality and Its Disciplinary Sites, April 1999, Binghamton
University, Binghamton, NY.
Quijano, Anibal, and Immanuel Wallerstein. 1992. “Americanity as a Concept, or the
Americas in the Imaginary of the Modern World-System.” International
Journal of Social Science 134: 549–59.
Rabasa, José. 1993. Inventing America. Norman: Oklahoma University Press.
Said, Edward. 1979. Orientalism. New York: Vintage.
Stavenhagen, Rodolfo. 1965. “Classes, Colonialism, and Acculturation.” Studies in
Comparative International Development 1(7): 53–77.
Stocking Jr., George W. 1968. Race, Culture, Evolution: Essays in the History of
Anthropology. New York: Free Press.
Tilly, Charles. 1990. Coercion, Capital, and European States, A.D. 990–1992. Cambridge:
Blackwell.
Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1835. Democracy in America. New York: Vintage Classics.
Viola, H., and C. Margolis. 1991. Seeds of Change: Five Hundred Years since Columbus.
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institute.
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1974–89. The Modern World-System. 3 vols. San Diego:
Academic Press.
. 1983. Historical Capitalism. London: Verso.
Young, Robert. 1995. Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture, and Race. London:
Routledge.

